                                                                   Master’s Thesis


                                        Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language
                                                      Model Conversations




arXiv:2607.05477v1 [cs.MA] 6 Jul 2026
                                                            Lars Benedikt Kaesberg




                                                         In Fulfillment of the Requirements
                                                                   for the Degree of
                                                                   Master of Science



                                                     Main Examiner:       Prof. Dr. Bela Gipp
                                                     Second Examiner:     Dr. Terry Lima Ruas
                                                     Supervisor:          Jan Philip Wahle



                                                                       GippLab
                                                       Georg August University of Göttingen
                                                             Göttingen, December 2024
Contents
1. Introduction                                                                                          1

2. Related Work                                                                                          5
   2.1. Decision-Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
   2.2. LLMs and Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
   2.3. Multi-Agent Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
   2.4. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8

3. Methodology                                                                                           9
   3.1. Multi-Agent Discussion Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           9
   3.2. Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15

4. Experiments                                                                                          17
   4.1. Performance of Decision Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
   4.2. Answer Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
   4.3. Alterations in Decision Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
   4.4. Challenge of Final Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
   4.5. Compute Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33

5. Epilogue                                                                                             35
   5.1. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35
   5.2. Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
   5.3. Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     37

6. References                                                                                           38

A. Results                                                                                                i

B. Prompts                                                                                              xi

C. MALLM Setup                                                                                          xv

D. Example Discussions                                                                                 xxiv

E. AI Usage Card                                                                                        xli




I hereby declare that I have written this thesis independently without any help from others and
without the use of documents or aids other than those stated. I have mentioned all used sources
and cited them correctly according to established academic citation rules.



Helsinki, December 31th, 2024
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                  1. Introduction


                                              Abstract
     Improving the task performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) is essential, yet
     scaling these models faces significant challenges such as diminishing returns and high
     costs. Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) offer a promising solution by distributing tasks
     among specialized agents to improve the overall task performance. This can reduce
     training costs at the expense of increased test time due to the discussion and decision-
     making process. The decision protocol is a critical component of MAS because it
     specifies how multiple agents collaborate to create a final solution. This thesis introduces
     the Multi-Agent LLM (MALLM) framework, which implements and evaluates various
     decision protocols, namely voting, consensus, and judge decision mechanisms, to simulate
     multi-agent discussions for conversational task solving. Unlike previous work that used
     a single decision protocol or tested them on limited datasets, this study systematically
     examines their impact on a diverse set of tasks, ranging from knowledge-based datasets
     (MMLU, MMLU-Pro, GPQA) and logic-based datasets (StrategyQA, MuSR, Math-lvl-5,
     SQuAD 2.0). The results indicate that consensus protocols excel in knowledge-intensive
     domains while voting and judge protocols are more effective for logic-based tasks.
     Increasing response diversity through independent solution generation improves decision
     quality, while changes in information access during the decision process have minimal
     impact.


     Keywords: Large Language Models, Multi-Agent Systems, Decision Protocols, Test-
     Time Compute, Reasoning



1. Introduction
Recent years have shown a trend to scale the size of LLMs to improve task performance [28].
It is unclear how far this trend can be pushed, as a further increase in the model size could
bring diminishing returns in task performance. Sutskever [38] recently stated that “Pre-training
as we know it will unquestionably end” highlighting potential upcoming limitations of scaling.
Additionally, the scalability of LLMs presents substantial challenges, with only major corporations
like OpenAI, Meta, and Anthropic possessing the necessary talent, computing resources, and
financial resources to train such expansive models [1], [27]. As the benefits of training larger LLMs
remain unclear, and the costs and environmental impact continue to rise, many researchers are
looking for alternative methods to improve task performance instead of scaling the model size
[23]. This revealed that not only increasing compute power for training larger LLMs but also for
inference (i.e., generating answers), can significantly enhance task performance [36]. Consequently,




                                                  1
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                              1. Introduction


researchers are exploring a range of strategies beyond scaling, such as prompting techniques [46]
and collaborative frameworks [15], [48], to further boost task performance without the need for
continually larger models.

Many methods can be used to achieve this new kind of scaling. One of the first approaches is the
so-called Chain-of-Thought (CoT) from Wei et al. [46]. It allows models to provide reasoning steps
before the final answer generation. This method is still widely used for simplicity, but many more
sophisticated approaches have been developed. For example, OpenAI refined this approach with its
new o1-preview model1 . This relies on further training of a model on these correct reasoning steps
to give LLMs better reasoning capabilities [47]. Other approaches without additional training can
be roughly divided into three categories: self-consistency [43], which involves generating multiple
reasoning paths and selecting the most consistent answer; self-refinement [24], which allows the
model to iteratively improve its own reasoning and answers; and multi-agent discussions. An
overview of how these methods work can be found in Figure 1.


                        Self-                            Self-
                                                                                 Multi-Agent
                     Consistency                      Refinement




         Agent 1       Agent 2      Agent X             Agent       Agent 1        Agent 2           Agent X

           LLM           LLM          LLM                LLM         LLM             LLM               LLM

                                                                   Solution 1     Solution 2        Solution X

        Solution 1    Solution 2   Solution X          Solution                 Repeat
                                                                                    TextX times
                                                                   Improved       Improved          Improved
                                                 Repeat X times    Solution 1     Solution 2        Solution X

                      Decision
                                                      Feedback
                      Protocol                                                     Decision
                                                                                   Protocol



                       Final                            Final                       Final
                      Solution                         Solution                    Solution


Figure 1: Illustration of solution generation process for self-consistency, self-refinement, and
multi-agent discussions.

In multi-agent discussions, each agent generates a solution, and these solutions are refined and
improved through iteration during the discussion. The method is effective because it combines the
strengths of self-consistency and self-refinement, mirroring how humans solve complex problems by
 1
     openai.com/index/introducing-openai-o1-preview




                                                           2
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   1. Introduction


bringing together experts from different fields to exchange ideas and enhance the outcome. The
downside of using multiple agents is that each one creates its own solution. This can also be seen
as an opportunity, as having multiple answers and using an agent to select the correct one may be
easier than coming up with a new solution. This can be compared to how multiple-choice questions
tend to be easier than free-text questions in exams. Still, a method is needed to combine these
solutions to produce a final solution.

This is often done using a majority metric to resolve these conflicts [6], [43]. These simple approaches
have been shown to yield good results, but it needs to be tested whether more sophisticated
approaches can further improve the results [43]. Decision protocols can have a significant impact on
task performance as they only need to select the correct solution from a pool of possible answers
[6], [43], [51]. Some results from Yang et al. [51] already demonstrate that incorporating a voting
step to determine the final solution can lead to improved outcomes. Further testing is necessary to
evaluate whether integrating additional information or confidence values can enhance this voting
process. In addition, more decision protocols, such as consensus or judge decision protocols, need
to be compared. To address these considerations, the following research questions are posed:

   1. How do decision-making mechanisms influence LLM performance in conversational
      tasks?
       1.1 Is there a decision protocol that consistently performs best?
       1.2 How effectively can these mechanisms adapt to different tasks?
       1.3 Does the round in which voting starts affect task performance?
       1.4 Does the number of agents proposing solutions matter?

   2. How does the diversity of responses affect the performance of decision protocols?
       2.1 Is it more efficient to start with one solution and iterate on it, or should each agent
           propose its own initial solution?
       2.2 Can different discussion protocols or prompting help increase the answer diversity?

   3. How do small variations in information provided during the decision phase impact
      decision protocols in multi-agent LLM systems?
       3.1 How do small changes in the amount of information provided during the decision phase
           affect task performance and decision stability?
       3.3 How does providing agents with new information (e.g., confidence scores or additional
           facts) after the discussion phase influence their voting decisions and final results?

   4. How do language agents react when challenged in a multi-agent setting?
       4.1 How often do language agents change their decisions when challenged?
       4.2 Can challenging an answer improve task performance?



                                                   3
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                1. Introduction


This work introduces MALLM2 , a new framework designed to simulate multi-agent discussions
for solving conversational tasks. MALLM enables multiple agents to collaboratively generate and
refine solutions, thereby enhancing the overall problem-solving process. My experiments reveal that
consensus protocols, which require agents to collaboratively agree on a solution, excel in knowledge-
intensive domains. In contrast, voting protocols, where agents cast votes on proposed answers,
and judge protocols, where a designated agent evaluates and selects the best solution, are more
effective for logic-based tasks. The number of agents participating in the discussion can increase
performance, but longer discussions hurt task performance. Furthermore, increasing response
diversity through independent solution generation improves task performance, while variations
in information provision during the voting phase have minimal impact on overall performance.
Smaller language models achieve significantly greater performance gains than larger models when
utilizing the MALLM framework, highlighting its ability to enhance models trained with limited
resources. However, this improvement requires an increase in computational power during inference.
When challenging the final solution of the decision protocol with a single agent, it can be seen that
these agents can detect incorrect answers and, if provided with enough reasoning details from the
discussion, can understand the solution. They cannot directly improve the solution as they lack
the multi-agent collaboration.




 2
     github.com/Multi-Agent-LLMs/mallm




                                                 4
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                  2. Related Work


2. Related Work
The area of decision protocols for MAS spans a wide array of research topics, ranging from artificial
intelligence [10], social choice theory [22], to multi-agent frameworks [15], [48], [55]. Decision-making
within MAS combines the language agents’ different objectives, strategies, and knowledge bases to
improve the final solution. Advancements in reasoning capabilities and computation cost allow the
usage of LLMs to simulate multi-agent discussions and use them to decide on the final solution
[51]. In this section, I analyze related work on decision-making, LLMs, and agents, while also
reviewing existing frameworks for simulating multi-agent discussions. This analysis identifies gaps
in functionality and the need for a novel framework for the experiments proposed in Section 4.


2.1. Decision-Making
A study conducted by Jones [18] in 1994 compared the relative strengths and weaknesses of the
voting-based and consensus-based decision-making procedures. It is focused on a case that involved
a citizen task force that dealt with a controversial public housing proposal. In the first year, they
used a consensus-based approach, which came to a final result, but afterward, some group members
reported that they were not satisfied with the outcome. In general, achieving consensus was a
lengthy process that could not satisfy everyone. In the second year, they used a voting-based
approach, which had to reach a two-thirds majority. The group members reported that they were
more comfortable with the approach as they felt that they had more impact on the overall result.
Ultimately, this approach failed as some members disturbed the voting process with strategic
absences. Similarly List [22] showed that voting systems are vulnerable to strategic manipulation,
but some methods exist to mitigate this. For example, reducing the voting protocol’s complexity
increases the resistance to manipulation. This can be done by limiting the number of votes for each
participant. Some approaches created complex rules to protect voting integrity with computational
complexity, but these are not useful in a small scope [2].

More recent work has already used hybrid consensus and voting-based approaches combined with
MAS as seen in ReConcile from Chen et al. [6]. Here, each agent generates an answer to a given
task. The final answer is determined by a weighted voting system for each round. Each agent
has to generate a confidence score for their solution. The confidence scores are averaged for the
same solutions and the solution with the highest combined confidence score gets selected. After
that, the next round starts, and the cycle is repeated. The process ends when all agents give the
same solution. This approach significantly outperforms the baseline but also uses different LLMs
for each agent. This expands the knowledge base, which can lead to better task performance.
Multi-agent discussions with only one model, such as the approach of Yang et al. [51], showed
smaller improvements. They use a voting-based approach that introduces a variety of voting




                                                   5
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                2. Related Work


methods. One is, approval voting, where each agent can vote for any number of answers, and the
most voted answer wins. For ranked voting, agents have to sort the answers according to their
preferences, and the answer with the highest combined ranking wins. Another method is cumulative
voting. Here, the agent can assign a certain number of points to each answer, and the answer
with the most points wins. The study showed that LLMs are susceptible to the order in which the
possible answers are presented. Overall, LLMs are not consistent with their votes, but this problem
can be reduced by using more powerful models or introducing personas to the agents [51].

In my research, I build on these findings by considering both voting-based and consensus-based
protocols. Additionally, I introduce a third class, the authoritarian judge decision protocol. I focus
on adapting them to multi-agent language models rather than human-based discussions as seen
in Jones [18]. Unlike previous studies that used several different models or introduced complex
voting mechanisms, I deliberately keep the underlying model structure consistent and emphasize
simplicity in the decision protocols to ensure comparability.


2.2. LLMs and Agents
Multi-agent discussions are expensive as they require a lot of messages exchanged between all
participants to reach a final answer. Therefore, it is important to use an efficient LLM, which has a
sufficient level of communication and role-playing skills even with a smaller model size. The recently
introduced Llama 3 model family provides many different model sizes [10]. The original Llama 3
model is available with 8 billion and 70 billion model parameters. After conducting the experiments,
they also released Llama 3.1 models with 8 billion, 70 billion, and 405 billion parameters. The
Llama 3.1 models have a longer context length and come with multilingual pre-training, which
makes them a good choice for future experiments. All models also exist as an instruction-fine-tuned
version, which is important for using the LLM as a chatbot or discussion participant. The two
smaller models (i.e., Llama 3 8B and Llama 3 70B) are very interesting as they are small enough
to fit on accessible hardware, such as described in Section 3.1.2.

There are many possibilities to further improve the performance of these models. Most of them
rely on increasing computational cost during inference to get better results [36]. Wei et al. [46]
introduced a very simple method called Chain-of-Thought (CoT), which requires only a small
change to the prompt. The model is asked to provide reasoning steps before reaching its final
conclusion. This can lead to substantial improvements in task performance, but this also depends
on the dataset used. As this method only requires a small change in the prompt, it can be used in
almost every situation. Another more sophisticated approach, called self-refinement, was shown by
Madaan et al. [24], which uses an LLM to iteratively improve its own answer. First, the model
creates an initial solution. This is followed by a feedback step, in which the model critiques its




                                                  6
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                2. Related Work


own answer. The feedback is then used to create a new and improved answer. This process can be
repeated indefinitely, but subsequent rounds have diminishing returns. The study showed that this
works better for more powerful models, as smaller models lack the capability to provide adequate
feedback. In contrast to the previous approach, Wang et al. [43] introduced a new method called
self-consistency. Here, one model creates many diverse answers to the same problem, also utilizing
CoT. With the help of a decision protocol, all these possible answers are combined into one final
answer by selecting the most occurring answer. This approach showed a good improvement over
the baseline.

To increase the variability of the answers from the agents, they can be prompted to role-play a
specific persona. Jiang et al. [17] has shown that larger LLMs such as GPT-3.5 [4] and GPT-4
[28] are capable of accurately displaying specific character traits based on personality tests. Later,
Samuel et al. [33] developed an automatic evaluation framework to test how well a LLM adheres
to its assigned persona in various environments, allowing a large-scale and efficient persona agent
evaluation. This showed that also smaller models, especially Llama 3 8B, are able to achieve a high
persona score, even outperforming much larger models like GPT-3.5. Kim et al. [19] evaluated the
performance of persona-prompted agents in multiple datasets and discovered that this can have
positive and negative impacts. It often comes with an increase in performance, but the persona can
introduce unwanted biases or get distracted from the task, and as Shi et al. [35] showed, irrelevant
context can hinder task performance. Kim et al. [19] introduced a method for automatically
generating personas for a given problem statement, removing the need to create agent personas
manually and making it possible to have specific personas for a wide range of tasks.

In my work, I integrate CoT prompting and persona-based role-playing into multi-agent discussions,
drawing on the strengths of self-refinement and self-consistency. This combination aims to maximize
performance gains without resorting to overly large models, keeping computational overhead at a
manageable level with accessible hardware. More details for the hardware used can be found in
Section 3.1.2.


2.3. Multi-Agent Frameworks
In the concept of a society of mind (SOM) [26], [54], higher-level intelligence is understood not
to arise from a singular entity but from the interaction and collaboration of simpler modular
cognitive components. Each of these components, or agents, operates with its own limited function
and purpose, yet when combined, they contribute to a dynamic, adaptive, and emergent form of
intelligence that mirrors the complexities of human cognition [26].

This paradigm has inspired recent advances in multi-agent frameworks within artificial intelligence,
where agents work together to solve problems beyond the capability of any single agent [6], [9]. The



                                                  7
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations               2. Related Work


frameworks proposed by Wu et al. [48] and Zhuge et al. [55] are similar and both enable researchers
to set up multi-agent discussions. AutoGen is able to simulate the interactions of agents with
different skills. Some have specific personas, others can access tools to better solve complex tasks,
and others can access other knowledge bases to improve factual correctness. Agents can collaborate
over multiple turns to adjust to feedback and find a collective decision [48]. SwarmGPT works
similarly to AutoGen but defines the agent interactions as graphs, where nodes represent operations
(such as LLM queries or tool use), and edges indicate information flow. This allows the framework
to dynamically optimize the graph to improve the efficiency of the framework [55].

MetaGPT allows the researcher to create Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). These can
be applied to different tasks and define how a task can be divided between multiple agents. For
example, a management agent defines requirements that need to be fulfilled by the programmer
agent, who is responsible for implementing all of these requirements. This allows to solve some
complex tasks very accurately as long as a SOP exists [15].

I build upon the ideas of these frameworks by designing a simpler MAS that emphasizes direct
collaboration through iterative discussion rather than extensive tool use. I focus on conversational
tasks, keeping agent interactions manageable while still allowing each agent to bring a unique
persona to the table. This approach preserves the core idea of combining specialised agents, but
streamlines the process to better fit the conversational paradigm and maintain efficiency.


2.4. Overview
This study extends the work form Jones [18] that showed differences between the voting-based
and consensus-based decision protocols. It adds a new class where a single authoritarian language
agent can decide on the final answer, similar to how a judge decides the final verdict. Voting-based
decision protocols are inspired by Yang et al. [51] as they already showed good results for MAS.
The Llama 3 family of models is used for all experiments, as they offer a good variety of models with
high task performance for relatively low resource usage. The existing multi-agent frameworks are
not designed for conversational task solving, which would require substantial modifications to adapt
them. In addition, they often lack built-in mechanisms for efficient parallelization, making them
less suitable for large datasets. Therefore, for this work, a new framework has been developed from
the ground up with parallelization in mind, enabling the seamless integration of any HuggingFace
dataset without altering the underlying code. Details can be found in Section 3.1.




                                                 8
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations               3. Methodology


3. Methodology
In this section, I introduce a new multi-agent framework for conversational task solving, specif-
ically designed to address the research questions outlined in Section 1. This framework enables
collaborative interactions between multiple agents to enhance problem-solving skills. Additionally,
I provide detailed information on the datasets used in this study.


3.1. Multi-Agent Discussion Framework
I present Multi-Agent LLM (MALLM)3 , a newly developed framework for multi-agent conversational
task solving with language agents. Multi-agent conversations are inherently expensive as they
require many requests per round and agent. Therefore, this framework is specially focused on
efficiency and modularity as I want to conduct many experiments with different parameters and
datasets. On top of that, these discussions can have a dynamic number of rounds, which can make
it even more expensive. To combat this, I designed MALLM to use the available resources efficiently
by performing many discussions asynchronously. The framework is aimed at researchers. Therefore,
modularity is especially important because it allows researchers to use the existing infrastructure
provided by MALLM and change certain functionalities, such as agent persona generation, agent
answer generation, discussion protocol, and decision protocol.


3.1.1. Architecture Overview

To better understand the different modules, I take a closer look at each component and what role
it plays in creating multi-agent discussions. An overview can be found in Figure 2 as it provides
an example workflow for the framework and how a discussion is created. The discussion starts
with generating personas relevant to the given task and assigning them to the participating agents.
The personas are generated using the same LLM which is later used for the agents. After that
the agents start to generate solutions and improve the suggestions from the other agents. The
turn order of the agents is defined by the discussion paradigm. This also defines which answers are
visible to other agents and who can talk to whom. The response generator defines how an agent
receives the other answers and also the way it responds. After a certain number of rounds or when
enough agents agree, a decision protocol is used to select the best answer either via voting, using
a judge agent, or just by looking for a certain consensus threshold. If the decision protocol fails,
for example, due to a tied vote, the discussion continues for another round. In the framework a
parameter can be defined to terminate discussions after a certain number of rounds to make sure
they do not communicate forever.

 3
     github.com/Multi-Agent-LLMs/mallm




                                                 9
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                              3. Methodology




                                                    Automatic Persona Generator


                                                                                             Identified Personas
                Identify 3 participants who will
                contribute to solving the task...                                     Agent 1: Gustave Eiffel (Architect
                                                                                      and designer of the Eiffel Tower)
             Task: Answer the given question.
           Sample: What is the height of the Eiffel                                   Agent 2: French Citizen (Lives for
                         Tower?                                                       25 years in france)
                  Possible options are:
               A: 101 meters, B: 41 meters,                       Persona             Agent 3: Engineer (Expertise in
               C: 787 meters, D: 312 meters                  Assignemnt Agent         civil engineering)
                                                                   (LLM)




       Response Generator (Agent Prompt)                                             Discussion

        System Prompt: You take part in a
        discussion to solve a task.                                                              Message: I think that ...
                                                                                                 Solution: Option D
        Task: Answer the given question.

        Input: What is the height of the Eiffel
        Tower? Possible options are ...
                                                                                      Agent 1
        Your role: Engineer (Expertise in ...)

        This is the discussion to the current
                                                                                      Memory
        point:
                                                                                      Protocol
        Agent 1: I think that ...

        Agent 2: I don't agree with ...

        Message: I agree with Agent 1
                   because ...                                Agent 3       Message: I don't agree with ...    Agent 2
        Solution: Option D                                                  Solution: Option C




                                                Decision Protocol (Cumulative Voting)

                Agent 1 final answer:                    Agent 2 final answer:                Agent 3 final answer:

          I think option D solves the problem       Option C sound for me the most       My final answer is option D with
          the best.                                 feasible.                            312 meters.

                   Voting Points:                          Voting Points:                       Voting Points:
          Agent 1: 10                               Agent 1: 4                           Agent 1: 7
          Agent 2: 7                                Agent 2: 1                           Agent 2: 11
          Agent 3: 3                                Agent 3: 5                           Agent 3: 1


                              Agent 1 wins the voting. The final solution is Option D (312 meters).




Figure 2: Example multi-agent discussion conducted in the MALLM framework. It showcases the
functionality of the four modules and how they work together to get an improved final solution.




                                                                 10
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                3. Methodology


Agent Personalities.    The first step of the discussion is the generation of agent personas. Each
of the agents participating in the discussion has a certain persona assigned to them. This can
unlock more knowledge for the LLM on a specific topic [19]. To get the best results, I want as
diverse personas as possible while still maintaining them to be relevant to the task. The default
setting for the framework is to prompt a LLM and ask for a persona relevant to the given task [45].
After each generation it also provides the generated personas to avoid duplication. This way of
generating personas provides a good starting point, but as this is built as a modular component, it
can be swapped out with another function, which, for example, generates half of the agents with
this method and initializes the other ones as neutral agents without a persona.


Response Generators. Another important part of multi-agent discussions is how each agent
responds to the previous responses. Do I use CoT to improve performance, or does this result
in too long answers? By changing the way an agent is prompted, a lot of performance can be
gained or lost. Therefore, it is key to make this as customizable as possible. The researcher has the
possibility to change the default behavior (neutral answers), for example, by prompting the agent
to be more critical or changing the way the discussion history is presented. The system prompt for
the agent’s persona can also be adjusted. MALLM already has many different built-in response
generators. The ones relevant for this work are the following.

  • Free Text is the most basic form of the agent prompt. Each agent gets a predefined number
     of discussion history rounds as memory. The prompt language is neutral, and the task is
     presented each round to mitigate the potential drift from the topic of the discussion [3]. In
     addition, the agent is always asked to agree or disagree with the answer of the previous agent.

  • Simple behaves very similar to the Free Text response generator, but the prompt is a bit
     simpler to make it easier to understand for the LLM and reduce the context length.

  • Critical forces the agent to respond very critically to the previous answer and try to find new
     solutions. Some studies have shown that LLMs can show some form of sycophancy, which
     is not helpful for a constructive discussion [34]. Encouraging them to be more critical may
     reduce this.

  • Reasoning doesn’t allow the agents to communicate their final solution with the other agents.
     They can only share reasoning that can be used to find a final solution. In the end, each
     agent has to come up with its own solution without being directly influenced by other agents.


Discussion Paradigms.    These paradigms define the discussion format for the entire task. They can
control the order in which the agents communicate with each other, and which answers are visible
only to certain agents. Currently, all the built-in discussion paradigms are static, meaning that



                                                 11
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                          3. Methodology


the turn order is predefined and cannot be changed based on specific events during the discussion.
However, due to the modular nature of MALLM, a new discussion paradigm can be added, for
example using an LLM as a moderator to dynamically decide which agent should respond next.
Current research by Yin et al. [52] and Becker [3] shows that discussion protocols have little impact
on downstream task performance. MALLM includes the following discussion paradigms, which are
illustrated in Figure 3. The first four paragdims are inspired by the work of Yin et al. [52], while
the fifth was developed as part of this work.

                                                                                         Collective
           Memory             Relay             Report                Debate
                                                                                         Refinement
         a1         a2   a1           a2          a1                    a1
                                                                                    a1       a2       a3



               a3              a3          a2               a3   a2     (2)    a3   a1       a2       a3

          Figure 3: Illustration of Discussion Paradigms available for use in MALLM

  • Memory is the most basic discussion paradigm. The agents respond to the solution of the
     previous agents with feedback or an improved solution. All answers are visible to the other
     agents.

  • Relay behaves similarly to the memory paradigm. The turn order is the same, but each
     agent can only see the answer from the previous agent.

  • Report introduces one agent as a moderator that can communicate with other agents. The
     other agents can only communicate with the moderator and have access to these messages
     only. Only the moderator can see all messages.

  • Debate is similar to the report paradigm, as it also needs a moderator. Here, the other agents
     can communicate for a predefined number of rounds before they forward their reasoning to
     the moderator agent, which starts the next round of debate.

  • Collective Refinement In this protocol, each agent first generates an answer independently.
     In each subsequent round, every agent receives the responses from all other agents at the
     same time. Using this shared information, each agent refines their own answer. This process
     continues throughout the rounds, helping agents gradually reach a shared and improved
     solution. There is no turn order, and all agents have the same level of knowledge in each
     round.


Decision Protocols. These are crucial for the framework as they decide which answer gets
presented as the final answer to the problem. Multi-agent discussions produce multiple results for




                                                       12
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                           3. Methodology


the same problem because each agent has its own reasoning and ideas on how to solve the problem.
Therefore, some process is needed to decide which answer looks the most promising. I divide these
decision protocols into three subtypes that I want to analyze. An overview of how each of these
decision protocols works theoretically can be found in Figure 4 and all prompts used for them can
be found in Appendix B.
        Consensus Decision Protocols

                                    2. Agents                      3. Agents are
          1. Initialize                                                                    4. Consensus
                                     discuss                      asked to agree
            agents                                                                           is reached
                                     problem                        or disagree

                                           No Consensus is reached

        Voting Decision Protocols

                             2. Agents             3. Agents              4. Each agent    5. Answer with
          1. Initialize
                              discuss           formulate final            votes for the     most votes
            agents
                              problem              answers                 best answer          wins

                                                 Tie in voting

        Judge Decision Protocols

                                    2. Agents                        3. Agents                4. Judge
          1. Initialize
                                     discuss                      formulate final           creates final
            agents
                                     problem                         answers                   answer


Figure 4: Illustration of the workflow for the different decision protocol families included in
MALLM.


  Consensus Based Decision Protocols. These are the simplest kinds of decision protocols. After
each answer, the next agent has to agree or disagree with the previous statement. Depending on
the response generator, this happens in the same message, and the agreement is extracted with
a regular expression, or this is split into multiple answers. If enough agents agree in order, there
is a consensus. The final answer is extracted by instructing the last agent to solve the given task
with the information available in the latest messages. The prompt used for this can be found
in Appendix B.1. There are several types of consensus decision protocols available in MALLM.
Majority consensus requires 50% of the agents to agree. Supermajority consensus requires
66% of the agents to agree, and unanimity consensus requires all agents to agree.


  Voting Based Decision Protocols. For voting based decision protocols, the process differs
slightly compared to consensus-based decision protocols. The agents are forced to discuss for a
predefined number of turns and afterward create a final solution. In the default setting, they have
to discuss for three rounds, as current research such as Du et al. [9] shows that this allows for
reasonable strong improvements considering computing resources. If there happens to be a tie in the



                                                    13
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                         3. Methodology


voting, the agents have to discuss it for another round, and after that, they are asked to vote again.
If they do not reach a final decision before exceeding the maximum number of rounds (defined in
the discussion configuration), the solution of the first agent is used. To analyze the impact of the
voting procedure, different processes similar to the work of Yang et al. [51] are implemented.

     • Simple Voting Each of the agents has only one vote. They can vote for any other agent or
         for themselves. The agent with the most votes wins.

     • Ranked Voting The agents have to rank all final answers. The best solution is chosen by
         adding the ranking indices for a given agent and then selecting the answer with the best
         cumulative rank.

     • Cumulative Voting Each agent has to distribute up to 25 points to all possible answers. They
         can also give fewer points and freely divide the points between all agents (even themselves).
         The winner is selected by adding all the points for a given agent and selecting the final answer
         with the most points.

     • Approval Voting The agent has to provide a list of solutions that it approves. After that,
         the approvals from all agents are counted, and the answer with the most approvals wins the
         vote.


     Judge Decision Protocol. The judge decision protocol starts similarly to the voting-based
decision protocols. The agents first have to discuss for three rounds, and then each agent has to
create a final solution on their own. Then a new neutral agent is created who is tasked with judging
all the answers and creating a new final answer based on all the reasoning presented in the agents’
final answers. This approach is also used in other research, as seen in Zheng et al. [53], where it
is used to select the best answers from different LLMs. In this work, it is not used to judge the
output of different models but rather the same model with different personas.


3.1.2. Setup for Experiments

For all experiments in this study, I use the MALLM framework with Llama 3 8B or 70B model4 .
The hardware for the smaller model are two NVIDIA RTX5000 with 16 GB of VRAM each, and
the larger model uses eight NVIDIA A100 with 40GB VRAM. A list of default parameters and
experiment-specific parameters can be found in Appendix C.




 4
     The two models used for this study can be found at meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct and meta-llama/Meta-
      Llama-3-70B-Instruct




                                                       14
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                3. Methodology


3.2. Datasets
The dataset selection is very important for this work. It needs to be tested whether decision
protocols perform well in multiple domains and whether there are some protocols that perform
better with specific tasks than others. Therefore, I selected many datasets from different domains
and divided them into two groups. There are the Knowledge-based Datasets like MMLU,
MMLU-Pro and GPQA. These datasets still require a lot of reasoning, but also a lot of very specific
domain knowledge. On the other hand, there are the Logic-based Datasets like StrategyQA,
MuSR, Math-lvl-5, and SQuAD 2.0. An overview of all these datasets can be found in Table 1 with
a description and the number of samples used for evaluation.
     Dataset         Description                                   Samples      Eval-Samples
      Knowledge-based
     MMLU            Massive Multitask Language Understand-           14,042           375 (x3)
                     ing benchmark covering 57 subjects
     MMLU Pro        Professional-level extension of MMLU with        12,032           374 (x3)
                     advanced questions
     GPQA            Challenging dataset of multiple-choice              546           250 (x3)
                     questions written by domain experts in
                     biology, physics, and chemistry
      Logic-based
     StrategyQA      Dataset of questions requiring implicit            2,289          330 (x3)
                     multi-hop reasoning
     MuSR            Logic reasoning for solving murder mystery          250           152 (x3)
                     stories
     Math-lvl-5      Tests high-level mathematical reasoning             721           252 (x3)
                     and problem-solving abilities
     SQuAD 2.0       Stanford QA Dataset with answerable and          11,873           373 (x3)
                     unanswerable questions

Table 1: All datasets used for evaluation with a short description, number of samples in the test
set, and number of samples used in this study. The datasets are divided into knowledge-based tasks
and logic-based tasks.

MMLU was chosen because it covers a wide range of topics from algebra to religion with relatively
simple questions [14]. To test these decision protocols on more difficult questions that also require
a bit more reasoning, GPQA and MMLU-Pro were selected. These two consist of difficult questions
on specific domains and, especially with GPQA, they are difficult to answer with web search, which
also means that the model is probably not pre-trained on these questions [32], [44]. StrategyQA
tests the reasoning performance of MALLM and the decision protocols, as it requires multiple
steps to reach the correct decision. Many of these questions are structured as two different tasks
that need to be solved, and the answers have to be combined with some reasoning to get the final



                                                 15
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   3. Methodology


answer. This can be difficult because each mistake can influence the overall result [11]. MuSR also
requires some multistep reasoning similar to StrategyQA but also comes with a long story that
needs to be understood to solve the murder mystery. This tests the performance of the framework
with long context length, which can lead to drift from the real task as agents are distracted by all
the additional information [3], [37]. For the Math-lvl-5 dataset, agents need to prove that they can
use really sophisticated logic and reasoning to find the correct solution, as this dataset does not
come with multiple choice options, but the agents must come up with the solution themselves [13].
The final dataset is SQuAD 2.0, where agents have to extract information from a given text to
answer a question. The challenge is that sometimes the needed information is not in the text. For
these cases, the agents must agree that the information is not given in the text [29].

As previously mentioned, it is very expensive to run these multi-agent discussions. Therefore, for
this work, I won’t run all samples from each dataset, but rather only a small subset, which still
gives a good representation of the whole dataset. Similar methods were used in Becker [3], Chen
et al. [6], and Yin et al. [52]. To estimate performance across multiple data sets of varying sizes
without processing each sample individually, a sampling strategy is applied that ensures a 95%
confidence level with a 5% margin of error. For each dataset, an initial sample size n0 is calculated
using the formula


                                                 Z 2 · p · (1 − p)
                                          n0 =                     ,
                                                         d2

with Z = 1.96 (corresponding to 95% confidence), p = 0.5 (assuming maximum variability), and
d = 0.05 (representing a 5% margin of error) [40]. For finite datasets, the parameter n0 is adjusted
with a finite population correction via


                                                      n0
                                            n=               ,
                                                   1 + n0N−1

where N is the total number of samples in each dataset, to avoid oversampling [7]. The specific
sample sizes for each dataset, reflecting this calculation, are provided in Table 1. To ensure
repeatability, each data set was tested three times [3], [6], [30], to obtain a standard deviation value.




                                                     16
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                     4. Experiments


4. Experiments
I propose four different experiments to answer the research questions. The first experiment tests
the performance of various decision protocols across different tasks and compares the results to
multiple baselines to determine any significant improvements. To assess whether certain decision
protocols are more effective in specific domains, a diverse range of datasets is used. The second
experiment evaluates how different prompting methods affect the diversity of solutions generated
by agents. The third experiment examines the stability of voting and judge decision protocols by
either withholding or providing additional information to see if these changes impact the results
and enhance their stability. The final experiment challenges the agents’ final answers to determine
their reliability and whether their conclusions can be easily altered after extended discussions. The
following sections provide detailed descriptions of each experiment.


Task Performance of Decision Protocols.        The first experiment is designed to test the effectiveness
of the multi-agent system in combination with decision protocols in solving specific datasets. I
use three different types of decision protocols to test if there is any advantage in using a specific
architecture over another. The first two types are voting and consensus-based decision protocols.
Jones [18] already showed some advantages, such as greater comfort for the participants if a decision
is achieved by consensus. However, it can also be more challenging to find a solution via consensus
and get a certain percentage of participants to agree. Here, voting can help to find a solution faster.
The last type of decision protocol I analyze is the judge decision protocol. In this case, a specific
agent has the power to create a final solution based on the other answers. All results are compared
with a solution from the same base model that is used for the agents and another solution created
using the model with CoT prompting [46]. In addition, each experiment is conducted with different
sized LLMs to test whether multi-agent discussions have a greater advantage for smaller or larger
models. For all results, the task performance and standard deviation in three runs are recorded. I
also take a look at the additional compute time needed for these multi-agent conversations.

This experiment is expanded by incorporating additional datasets to compare task performance in
different domains to check if there is a noticeable difference. In addition, it can further analyze
the usefulness of certain more strict decision protocols, such as unanimity consensus, as it takes
more time to reach this kind of consensus. Some studies from the European Union are already
investigating the usefulness of these decision-making protocols compared to the greater flexibility if
a less strict consensus protocol is used [5], [12].


Response Diversity.     In this experiment, both the response generators Critical and Reasoning
and the discussion paradigm Collective Refinement are used to encourage more diverse responses




                                                      17
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                           4. Experiments


from each agent. By using these different response generators and discussion paradigms, the
experiment aims to increase the variety of solutions produced, thereby increasing the effectiveness
of the decision protocols. It is expected that the decision protocol will have a greater impact
if agents generate unique responses, as this diversity increases the probability of including the
correct solution. However, increased diversity may also present challenges in accurately selecting
the optimal response, requiring more robust decision mechanisms.


Decision Protocol Alterations. In this experiment, only the voting and judge decision protocols
are analyzed. It is designed to track the impact of adding or removing specific information during
the voting process. As Shi et al. [35] showed, the addition of irrelevant information can have a
big impact on the downstream task performance of LLMs. To test the effect of this in the voting
step, I add or remove certain information from the voting prompt and calculate the downstream
task performance. These changes include access to the complete discussion history, providing
additional information relevant to the task, calculating a confidence score of the agents in their final
answer, and using public or anonymous voting. Additional information is provided with the help
of ContextPlus5 . This package scans relevant Wikipedia pages and combines the most important
paragraphs from the page into one coherent final piece of additional information. The confidence
values for each final answer are obtained in different ways to test which approach yields the best
results. Chen et al. [6] proposes a method for directly prompting the agent to estimate its own
confidence in the answer. This is very simple, but as Yang et al. [50] showed, LLMs tend to be
overconfident with their answer. Therefore, I propose two more methods. The first one depends on
the log-probabilities of the LLM output tokens. They are combined using the equation


                                                   t∈tokens(a) exp (logprob(t))
                                                  P
                                 clogprob (a) =                                   ,
                                                              |a|

Here, clogprob (a) represents the confidence of an agent in its final response a. The function iterates
over all tokens in a, calculating the mean probability of each token. Since the exponential function
is the inverse of the logarithm, it transforms the log probabilities back to probabilities, yielding
values between 0 and 1 for each token. The last method uses the similarity of the answer in the
following rounds as a proxy for the confidence of an agent in its answer. If a model stays with its
answer for multiple rounds and cannot be deterred by other agents, the agent seems to have a
higher confidence in its answer. This is estimated by calculating the cosine similarity between the
answer embeddings produced by an SBERT model [31].



 5
     A library developed by Florian Wunderlich. Available under: github.com/Multi-Agent-LLMs/context-plus




                                                       18
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                       4. Experiments


Challenge of Results. The last experiment focuses on testing the consistency of the agents.
Previous studies show that people’s opinions can be changed even without discussion or persuasive
arguments [20]. Especially, social pressure has a large impact on the opinion of people and can also
be used to change it [8], [25]. To answer whether this behavior also exists in language agents, the
final answer of each agent is challenged. The agent is then allowed to correct or confirm its final
answer. The change in correctness is analyzed for the cases when the agent changes its answer.


4.1. Performance of Decision Protocols
This experiment analyzes the difference in task performance for all decision protocols explained in
Section 3.1.1 for all datasets introduced in Section 3.2. The setup for this experiment can be found
in Section 3.1.2 and additional details in Appendix C. It aims to answer the following research
question:

How do decision-making mechanisms influence LLM performance in conversational
tasks?
      1. Is there a decision protocol that consistently performs best?
      2. How effectively can these mechanisms adapt to different tasks?
      3. Does the round in which voting starts affect task performance?
      4. Does the number of agents proposing solutions matter?
 Option                     MMLU         MMLU-Pro        GPQA         SQuAD        StrategyQA     MuSR         Math-lvl-5
 Baseline                   44.8 ± 1.9    28.5 ± 1.3     28.9 ± 1.2   52.3 ± 2.2    51.7 ± 2.5    25.8 ± 1.6     8.8 ± 1.3
 Baseline with CoT          53.1 ± 4.6    32.2 ± 4.7     29.9 ± 0.6   53.8 ± 1.2    55.5 ± 1.3    29.5 ± 2.6     8.7 ± 0.6
 Simple Voting              53.3 ± 1.8    32.0 ± 2.7     30.5 ± 0.9   56.2 ± 0.5    58.5 ± 0.9    55.2 ± 1.5     9.5 ± 1.7
 Ranked Voting              49.2 ± 1.5    33.1 ± 4.6     27.3 ± 3.9   58.0 ± 0.8    56.2 ± 3.4    52.5 ± 0.0     6.8 ± 1.3
 Cumulative Voting          52.6 ± 4.0    28.3 ± 3.1     31.3 ± 2.8   55.8 ± 3.4    61.2 ± 1.6    56.8 ± 4.2     9.0 ± 1.5
 Approval Voting            43.0 ± 2.1    29.2 ± 5.2     31.3 ± 2.6   46.5 ± 1.4    58.7 ± 0.4    50.9 ± 4.0     7.8 ± 2.6
 Average6                   51.7 ± 2.4    31.1 ± 3.5     29.7 ± 2.5   56.7 ± 1.6    58.6 ± 2.0    54.8 ± 1.9     8.4 ± 1.5
 Judge                      53.7 ± 4.7    33.5 ± 0.8     27.6 ± 2.3   57.2 ± 0.6    53.7 ± 2.0   59.3 ± 1.0      9.2 ± 3.0
 Majority Consensus        53.2 ± 2.5     36.4 ± 2.1    32.3 ± 2.9    43.1 ± 2.1    59.9 ± 0.1    27.8 ± 2.5     9.2 ± 3.0
 Supermajority Con.        54.6 ± 3.6     35.2 ± 3.0    30.7 ± 2.1    44.4 ± 0.4    56.4 ± 2.1    29.3 ± 2.6     9.2 ± 0.8
 Unanimity Con.            54.2 ± 1.0     36.3 ± 0.4    30.0 ± 2.3    43.4 ± 2.0    58.8 ± 2.6    28.2 ± 2.8    10.8 ± 1.6
 Average                   54.0 ± 2.7     36.0 ± 1.8    31.0 ± 2.4    43.6 ± 1.5    58.4 ± 1.6    28.4 ± 2.6     9.7 ± 1.8
 Metric                    Accuracy      Accuracy       Accuracy      F1 Score      Accuracy     Accuracy      Accuracy

Table 2: Task performance of MALLM using memory discussion paradigm with different decision
protocols. Agents use Llama 8B model as the backbone model. Bold performance values performed
the best on a given dataset. Standard deviation is calculated on three independent runs.

The first question can be answered by looking at the results presented in Table 2. There is no clear
trend that one decision protocol performs best on all datasets. In all tasks, the results produced
 6
     Approval Voting is left out as it consistently fails to reach a voting decision as seen in Table 4.




                                                              19
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                       4. Experiments


by MALLM with some decision protocol outperform the simple baseline and also outperform the
baseline that uses CoT. For some datasets like MMLU, GPQA, and Math-lvl-5, this is only by
a small margin. An overall trend can be observed that on the first three knowledge-based tasks,
consensus decision protocols achieve a better score than the other decision protocols. This suggests
that these tasks benefit from the sharing of knowledge and reaching of a collective agreement. The
later logic-based tasks are better solved using voting and judge decision protocols, likely because
they require more individual reasoning or an authoritative decision. The math task stands out as
an outlier in this trend. The best improvements are seen in SQuAD 2.0 with 4.2%, StrategyQA
with 5.7%, and MuSR with 19.8% improvement compared to the CoT baseline. It is necessary
to consider the results from the MuSR dataset with a degree of caution since the baseline and
consensus-based methods encountered difficulties in adhering to the prompt with the smaller Llama
8B model.
 Option                     MMLU         MMLU-Pro        GPQA         SQuAD        StrategyQA      MuSR         Math-lvl-5
 Baseline                  72.7 ± 0.8     57.5 ± 0.7     45.2 ± 2.0   69.5 ± 0.8    76.6 ± 2.3    63.2 ± 1.2     26.5 ± 0.9
 Baseline with CoT         75.5 ± 0.8     60.8 ± 1.0     45.9 ± 1.5   68.0 ± 1.4    78.2 ± 1.0    66.8 ± 1.6     26.7 ± 0.6
 Simple Voting              75.5 ± 1.3    56.5 ± 5.4     45.7 ± 0.3   69.5 ± 0.5    81.2 ± 1.4    59.3 ± 3.0     12.0 ± 0.9
 Ranked Voting              73.3 ± 1.9    54.3 ± 0.9     44.2 ± 2.1   70.6 ± 1.1    80.3 ± 1.0    59.5 ± 0.5     12.0 ± 1.3
 Cumulative Voting          72.5 ± 1.9    53.0 ± 0.4     43.9 ± 3.1   69.7 ± 1.1    80.0 ± 0.8    60.0 ± 1.7     11.9 ± 2.4
 Approval Voting            50.2 ± 2.1    36.3 ± 3.7     33.0 ± 3.4   24.3 ± 5.0    46.4 ± 13.9   49.1 ± 12.4    7.9 ± 2.3
 Average7                   73.8 ± 1.7    54.6 ± 2.2     44.6 ± 1.8   69.9 ± 0.9    80.5 ± 0.7    59.6 ± 1.7     12.0 ± 1.5
 Judge                      72.2 ± 1.4    58.0 ± 3.9     42.9 ± 5.1   65.7 ± 1.1    82.9 ± 1.3    64.2 ± 1.0     19.2 ± 0.6
 Majority Consensus         74.0 ± 1.4    57.3 ± 3.0    43.7 ± 1.0    58.2 ± 1.0    80.1 ± 0.3    61.3 ± 3.3     23.2 ± 3.3
 Supermajority Con.         71.9 ± 1.2    57.0 ± 1.7    46.6 ± 0.8    54.3 ± 1.9    80.3 ± 1.3    60.2 ± 0.3     25.7 ± 2.4
 Unanimity Con.             72.2 ± 2.4    57.3 ± 1.5    45.3 ± 2.5    56.7 ± 2.2    78.1 ± 2.3    61.3 ± 0.8     20.7 ± 1.5
 Average                    72.7 ± 1.7    57.2 ± 2.1    45.2 ± 1.4    56.4 ± 1.7    79.5 ± 1.3    60.9 ± 1.5     23.2 ± 2.4
 Metric                    Accuracy      Accuracy       Accuracy      F1 Score      Accuracy      Accuracy      Accuracy

Table 3: Task performance of MALLM using memory discussion paradigm with different decision
protocols. Agents use the Llama 70B model as the backbone model. Bold performance values
performed the best on a given dataset. The standard deviation is calculated on three independent
runs.

Compared to these results, the larger Llama 3 70B model performs much better overall, as seen
in Table 3. Most of the results are a bit better than the baseline, but the multi-agent discussions
are only in a few cases able to outperform the CoT baseline. This model does not fail to follow
the prompt for the MuSR baseline and consensus-based decision protocols. Therefore, the big
performance gain from the smaller model cannot be observed here. SQuAD 2.0 and StrategyQA
had the largest performance gains, even outperforming the CoT baseline, similar to the results
from the smaller model. This difference in task performance can have many reasons. As Li et al.
[21] showed, smaller models are more likely to hallucinate, which reduces task performance. This
can be mitigated by using multiple agents because it is less likely that two agents hallucinate the
 7
     Approval Voting is left out as it consistently fails to reach a voting decision as seen in Table 4.




                                                              20
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                       4. Experiments


same things. Larger models tend to hallucinate less, reducing this effect for the Llama 3 70B model
[21]. In general, Llama 3 70B has a much higher baseline for task performance, making it more
difficult to improve baseline results. Many of the improvements by the Llama 3 8B model are quite
small, except for the ones where the Llama 3 70B model also outperforms the CoT baseline. This
can be taken as evidence that these multi-agent discussions require specific problem structures,
or else the agents are just talking about the same results for multiple rounds and agreeing with
each other. If these discussions continue too long, they can drift away from the original task, which
reduces task performance. This has also been observed by Becker [3] and an example can be seen
in Appendix D.3. A positive example of how discussion can help task performance can be seen in
Appendix D.1.

To further analyze the strengths and weaknesses of different decision protocols, it is helpful to take
a closer look at more specific results from the SQuAD 2.0 dataset. The goal of this task is to extract
some specific information from a provided context. If this information is not included within the
context, the agents have to mark the answer as unsolvable. In Figure 5, the task performance for
all decision protocols is divided into three different classes [29]. The first class includes all answers.
The second class only contains samples that have the answer provided in the given context. The
last class contains all samples that are unanswerable with the help of the given context.

             0.8

             0.7

             0.6                                                                      Simple Voting
                                                                                      Cumulative Voting
             0.5
                                                                                      Ranked Voting

  F1-Score
             0.4
                                                                                      Judge
             0.3                                                                      Majority Consensus

             0.2                                                                      Supermajority Consensus
                                                                                      Unanimity Consensus
             0.1

              0
                   All Samples        Sample has Answer        Sample has no Answer

Figure 5: Task performance of MALLM on SQuAD 2.0 divided into three groups. All samples,
samples that provide the answer in the context, and samples that don’t provide the answer. Approval
voting is left out as it consistently fails to reach a voting decision as seen in Table 4. The standard
deviation is calculated on three independent runs.

There is a big performance difference between voting and consensus-based decision protocols for
SQuAD 2.0. Overall voting has a higher F1-Score, and by only looking at the samples that are
answerable, this difference is even more pronounced. This changes with unanswerable samples, as
consensus-based decision protocols consistently outperform the other decision protocols. This shows




                                                          21
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                    4. Experiments


that these different protocols have specific tasks in which they perform better. For voting decision
protocols it is more difficult to agree that this sample has no answer as this requires them to agree
on the final verdict that it is unanswerable. These samples are often constructed to fool the reader,
as seen in Appendix D.2. This makes it difficult for voting as some agents are tricked, and then
propose this as a solution which also tricks other agents into voting for them. In consensus decision
protocols, this does not happen that easily, as multiple agents have to agree in a row. It can also
be observed that the consensus protocols with a more strict consensus threshold tend to perform
better here. Although all types of decision protocols have their specific strengths and weaknesses,
voting decision protocols outperform consensus decision protocols here because there are more
samples with answers than without answers. This results in a higher overall score for the voting
and judge decision protocols.

The data in Table 4 shows the number of turns that are needed for each decision protocol to reach
a final decision for the MMLU dataset. Most of the voting decision protocols are able to vote for a
final answer already in the first round in which they are allowed to vote. Simple voting has the
highest agreement rate, but also cumulative and ranked voting only need in a few cases another
round. In contrast, the approval decision protocol only achieves this in ∼ 27% of the cases. About
14% need another round and the rest is canceled after the fifth round. This happens because these
models like to agree with each other, and therefore they tend to vote for many of the answers,
which often leads to a tie. Therefore, more restrictive voting decision protocols can reach a decision
more easily, as a tie is less likely. The judge decision protocol always finishes after the third round,
as it just generates a final answer based on the other solutions, and no tie can occur. The consensus
decision protocols require only one to two rounds to reach consensus and still achieve a higher task
performance because these results are based on the MMLU dataset. In Appendix A.2 the results
for all the datasets and models can be found. The decision protocols tend to behave similarly in
terms of rounds needed to create a final answer, independent of task and model.

 Group          Turn 1     Turn 2     Turn 3      Turn 4     Turn 5     Task Performance Score
 Voting          0.00%      0.00%      99.33%      0.50%      0.17%               53.3 ± 1.8
 Cumulative      0.00%      0.00%      94.00%      5.50%      0.50%               52.6 ± 4.0
 Ranked          0.00%      0.00%      91.17%      7.83%      1.00%               49.2 ± 1.5
 Approval        0.00%      0.00%      26.67%     14.33%     59.00%               43.0 ± 2.1
 Judge           0.00%      0.00%     100.00%      0.00%      0.00%               53.7 ± 4.7
 Majority        80.00%     13.67%      4.83%      1.00%      0.50%               53.2 ± 2.5
 Supermaj.       79.33%     14.33%      4.83%      1.00%      0.50%               54.6 ± 3.6
 Unanimity       59.50%     21.67%     12.67%      3.50%      2.67%               54.2 ± 1.0

Table 4: Number of rounds needed for each decision protocol to reach a final decision for the
MMLU dataset.




                                                  22
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                  4. Experiments


The next analysis focuses on the third and fourth points of the first research question. Here I
track performance gains and losses for agents that must communicate for more rounds before they
are allowed to vote. In the current setup, agents communicate for three rounds, as this showed
promising results in Du et al. [9]. The previous analysis based on Table 4 shows that consensus
decision protocols achieve better task performance even with fewer turns. If this also works for
the voting decision protocols, less compute power is needed, which improves the efficiency of the
multi-agent discussions.

               75%                                                               75%




               70%                                                               70%




               65%                                                               65%


    ACCURACY                                                          ACCURACY
               60%                                                               60%




               55%                                                               55%




               50%                                                               50%
                     1   2   3   4     5   6    7   8   9   10                         1   2   3   4     5   6    7    8   9   10
                                 Number of Rounds                                                  Number of Agents


                                     (a)                                                               (b)

Figure 6: Graph (a) shows the task performance on StrategyQA when the agents have to
talk for a given number of rounds before they are allowed to vote using simple voting decision
protocol. Graph (b) shows the task performance on StrategyQA with a different number of agents
participating in the discussion. The final answer is also created using the simple voting decision
protocol. The standard deviation is calculated on three independent runs.

To analyze the impact of the first round that allows for voting, Figure 6a shows the task performance,
compared to the number of rounds until the first vote. The data is generated using the simple voting
decision protocol in the StrategyQA dataset. Although the results are quite noisy, a downward
trend can be observed, visualized by the dotted line. This shows that more discussion rounds can
hinder task performance, further supporting the hypothesis of Becker [3] that these agents tend
to drift away from the real problem, resulting in lower accuracy of the final answer. Figure 6b
analyzes the same decision protocol and dataset but scales the number of agents who collaborate
on the problem. In this case, the dotted line shows an upward trend in task performance with
an increasing number of agents. Recent work, such as Wang et al. [42], shows that an increase in
the number of agents does not automatically lead to better task performance. Chen et al. [6] uses
several different LLM base models for multi-agent discussion. They showed that the more different



                                                                 23
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                4. Experiments


models used, the better the performance improvement. Therefore, the most likely reason why an
upward trend can be seen in this case is due to the personas of the agents. This allows the model
to access different information and makes the discussion more diverse. Similarly, different base
models also increase the diversity and knowledge base.

These results are similar to the observed improvement in self-consistency, where an increase in
the number of answers increases task performance [43]. Here, having more agents generating
solutions also tends to produce better scores. However, increasing the number of rounds reduces
performance, which should not occur if self-refinement is reliable. Recent research questions the
results of Madaan et al. [24], with Huang et al. [16] showing that these results may be unreliable,
which is also supported by these findings.


4.1.1. Takeaways

  1. Task-specific Protocol Performance: Voting protocols excel in knowledge-based tasks,
     while consensus protocols perform better in logic-based and unanswerable tasks.

  2. Model Size Effects: Smaller models benefit more from multi-agent discussions, while larger
     models show limited improvement due to higher baseline performance and lower hallucination.

  3. Impact of Discussion Rounds: Limiting discussion rounds before voting enhances perfor-
     mance by minimizing possible task drift.

  4. Answer Diversity: More agents improve task performance through enriched discussions
     and greater access to information.


4.2. Answer Diversity
In multi-agent systems, response diversity is a critical factor in improving decision protocols;
therefore, this research question focuses on understanding how response diversity can be enhanced
and used effectively.

How does the diversity of responses affect the performance of decision protocols?
  1. Is it more efficient to start with one solution and iterate on it, or should each agent propose
     its own initial solution?
  2. Can different discussion protocols or prompting help increase the answer diversity?

During all experiments, a pattern could be observed in which these agents tend to agree with
each other, resulting in similar answers. To achieve better results with a decision protocol, it is
important to have multiple possible answers, as it tends to be easier to select the correct answer
from a pool of possible answers than to come up with a solution on our own. This is also a basis



                                                24
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                      4. Experiments


for how self-consistency achieves better results [43] and why multiple-choice tests tend to be easier.
Currently, the first agent comes up with a solution and all other agents can either generate a new
solution or improve on the first one. As these models like to agree, they often try to improve the
first solution instead of providing a new solution based on their expertise. This leads to a smaller
knowledge base for the whole discussion and possibly hinders task performance. This hypothesis is
tested by not allowing the agents to improve any other answer but forcing them to generate their
initial answer on their own. In the following rounds, they can iterate on their own or on any other
solution. This creates at least one answer based on the expertise of each agent.
                                                          Baseline       All Agents Drafting

               80%

               70%

               60%

               50%


    ACCURACY
               40%

               30%

               20%

               10%

               0%
                     Simple Voting   Cumulative   Ranked Voting      Approval       Judge      Majority   Supermajority    Unanimity
                                       Voting                         Voting

Figure 7: Comparison of agents iterating on one initial draft (baseline) vs. each agent generating
one initial draft on the StrategyQA dataset. The standard deviation is calculated on three
independent runs.

The results of this approach can be seen in Figure 7. All decision protocols are tested, with only
the first agent drafting a solution and all agents drafting an initial solution. For almost all decision
protocols, the approach with all agents generating an initial solution gives a higher average score.
Only for the majority consensus protocol this is different, but it is still within the standard deviation.
This shows that increased answer diversity seems to help with task performance.

The next experiment analyzes the impact of the collective refinement discussion protocol. This
builds on the idea of the previous experiment. In fact, this discussion protocol always forces all
agents to come up with a solution and does not allow any inter-round communication. Only the
solutions from the previous round are presented to all agents, which results in no active turn order.
Therefore, less communication takes place and the ideas can evolve more independently, which
should help with answer diversity. Having no turn order of the agents makes this discussion protocol
unsuitable for consensus-based decision protocols, as they require some specific order, which allows




                                                                         25
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                 4. Experiments


them to agree or disagree with the previous answers. Therefore, this experiment was performed
only using the voting and judge decision protocols. The results of this approach can be seen in
Figure 8. Compared to Figure 7, the improvements are slightly stronger, but this also benefits
from the fact that this discussion protocol forces each agent to come up with an initial solution on
their own. Nevertheless, limiting active communication between agents seems to also help with
task performance.

                                               Baseline     Collective Improvment

                         80%

                         70%

                         60%

                         50%


              ACCURACY
                         40%

                         30%

                         20%

                         10%

                         0%
                               Simple Voting   Cumulative    Ranked Voting Approval Voting   Judge
                                                 Voting

Figure 8: Comparison of agents discussing using the memory discussion protocol (baseline)
compared to the collective refinement discussion protocol on the StrategyQA dataset. The standard
deviation is calculated on three independent runs.

In contrast to changing the discussion protocol, the next experiment focuses on the response
generator. An explanation of its role in MALLM can be found in Figure 2. There are two response
generators implemented that are focused on improving the answer diversity within multi-agent
conversations. The critical response generator changes the agent prompt to analyze the answers of
the other agents more critically and point out all errors. This should reduce the agreeability of
the agents and overall result in more diverse solutions. The reasoning response generator does not
allow the agents to suggest a final solution to the other agents but only share the reasoning that is
important to get to a final decision. With this approach, each agent should be able to come up
with a solution on its own and be less influenced by other agents. The results in Figure 9 show that
the critical response generator achieves better scores with voting-based decision protocols. The
reasoning response generator seems to perform always worse than the baseline.




                                                             26
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                            4. Experiments



                                 Baseline     Critical Response Generator      Reasoning Response Generator

                70%

                60%

                50%

                40%

     ACCURACY   30%

                20%

                10%

                0%
                      Simple Voting Cumulative Ranked Voting    Approval      Judge       Majority   Supermajority   Unanimity
                                      Voting                     Voting

Figure 9: Comparison of agents using the default response generator compared to the reasoning
and critical response generator on the StrategyQA dataset. The standard deviation is calculated
on three independent runs.

To further analyze the results, I created a similarity score that computes the mean cosine similarity
between the embeddings of all the agents’ final answers on a given task. The embeddings are
created using the sentence transformer SBERT8 . This is done for all methods that aim to improve
response diversity. The results can be found in Table 5. Overall, it can be seen that all of these
similarities are pretty high, but this is expected for multiple-choice datasets. All strategies that
achieve a better mean task performance in the StrategyQA dataset also show a decreased similarity
of answers. Only the reasoning response generator shows an increased answer similarity score,
which also results in a large drop in task performance. The critical response generator is an outlier,
as it has a strongly decreased similarity score but only a small improvement in task performance.
This can probably be attributed to the decrease in discussion quality as the agents are forced to
disagree more often with each other.

                 Strategy                   Baseline      All draft         Collective      Critical      Reasoning
                 Similarity Score           0.8880        0.8704            0.8446          0.8431        0.9162
                 Mean Accuracy              58.3%         62.8%             65.7%           59.4%         51.9%
                 Delta Baseline             0.0%          4.5%              7.4%            1.1%          -6.4%

Table 5: Final answer similarity based on average cosine similarity between SBERT embeddings
of final answers compared to task performance on StrategyQA dataset.



 8
     sbert.net




                                                                    27
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                    4. Experiments


4.2.1. Takeaways

  1. Diverse Ideas: Encouraging agents to independently generate solutions leads to a wider
      range of ideas, which improves decision-making and overall performance.

  2. Effective Collaboration: Using strategies that promote independent thinking and limit
      group influence improves performance.


4.3. Alterations in Decision Protocols
This section focuses on the voting and judge decision protocols, as both have a final decision
step that can be influenced, in contrast to consensus decision protocols, where a final solution is
reached during discussion. The research question primarily analyses task performance when some
information is withheld or additional information is added during this final step.

How do small variations in information provided during the decision phase impact
decision protocols in multi-agent LLM systems?
  1. How do small changes in the amount of information provided during the decision phase affect
      task performance and decision stability?
  2. How does providing agents with new information (e.g., confidence scores or additional facts)
      after the discussion phase influence their voting decisions and final results?

This experiment focuses only on the voting and judge decision protocol as explained earlier, but
additionally, the approval voting decision protocol is also left out. This is done because this decision
protocol cannot consistently arrive at a final solution, as seen in Table 4. This would make it less
comparable, since the final answer is simply the last solution provided by the last agent and not
created with a voting step. Only four datasets are used in this experiment, as some alterations are
computationally expensive. These datasets are MMLU, MMLU-Pro, StrategyQA, and SQuAD 2.0,
as they showed good results and provide an even mix between knowledge and logic-based datasets.
Figure 10 shows the mean task performance of all decision protocols in the StrategyQA dataset.
The following alterations were applied to the decision protocols:

  • Anonymous Voting. This is the default behavior for all decision protocols. The final
      answers are presented without any additional information to anonymize decisions and prevent
      bias.

  • Public Voting. In this protocol, solutions are linked to their proposers, but individual votes
      remain anonymous. This provides transparency on the origin of ideas while preserving the
      anonymity of voters.




                                                  28
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                           4. Experiments


    • 100% Confidence. Assumes agents are completely confident in their final answers, treating
             each response as definitive without any explicit confidence calculation. This alteration is
             added as a baseline for the following dynamic confidence alterations.

    • Prompted Confidence. Agents are directly asked to estimate their confidence in their final
             response, as proposed by Chen et al. [6].

    • Logprob Confidence. Confidence is calculated based on the log probabilities of the tokens
             in the output of the model, as described in the equation provided in Section 4.

    • Consistency Confidence. Measures confidence based on the consistency of the answers in
             multiple rounds, using cosine similarity between embeddings generated by SBERT [31].

    • Additional Information. Relevant external knowledge, extracted using ContextPlus, is
             provided to agents to improve decision quality.

    • Discussion History. Access to the complete dialogue history is provided, allowing agents to
             build on past exchanges and improve their decisions.

             80.0%

             75.0%

             70.0%


  ACCURACY
             65.0%

             60.0%

             55.0%

             50.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%        Prompted     Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence   Confidence   Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 10: Mean task performance on the StrategyQA dataset for all voting and judge decision
protocols with all variations. A description of each alteration can be found in Section 4.3. Standard
deviation is calculated on three independent runs.

Overall, the alterations perform very similarly, without a clear improvement over the baseline. The
results for the other datasets can be found in Appendix A.1 and there is also no visible improvement
or trend that some alterations perform differently. Sometimes, anonymous solutions perform
better than public solutions, and for other datasets, vice versa. Adding confidence scores does not
seem to have a big impact either, as all scores are very close to each other. Providing additional
information and the full discussion history also does not provide a measurable improvement. All
task performances are within one standard deviation of each other. In Figure 11 the same results
are shown but divided for each decision protocol. All results for the other datasets divided for each
decision protocol are available in Appendix A.1.



                                                                 29
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                              4. Experiments


In conclusion, the alterations applied to the voting and judge decision protocols, ranging from
variations in anonymity and confidence estimation to the provision of additional information, did
not lead to significant differences in task performance in the datasets tested. As illustrated in
Figure 11, all modifications yielded performance results within one standard deviation of each
other. This consistency suggests that these decision protocols are robust to small changes in the
information provided during the final decision-making phase. The lack of measurable impact implies
that the agents do not fully utilize the additional information or that the existing protocols already
capture the essential elements required for effective decision-making.
                                     Cumulative Voting       Ranked Voting    Simple Voting     Judge

             80.0%

             75.0%

             70.0%



  ACCURACY
             65.0%

             60.0%

             55.0%

             50.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 11: Task performance on the StrategyQA dataset for all voting and judge decision protocols
with all variations. A description of each alteration can be found in Section 4.3. The standard
deviation is calculated on three independent runs.



4.3.1. Takeaways

    1. Minimal Impact of Information Variations: Changes in the amount or type of informa-
             tion provided during the voting phase do not significantly affect task performance.

    2. Limited Influence of Confidence Scores and Additional Facts: Providing agents with
             confidence estimates or additional factual information after the discussion phase does not
             substantially alter their voting decisions or final outcomes.

    3. Robustness of Decision Protocols: The stability (standard deviation) of voting and
             judge decision protocols remain largely unaffected by alterations in the information presented
             during the final decision step.




                                                                   30
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   4. Experiments


4.4. Challenge of Final Solution
The final experiment investigates the confidence of agents in the solutions they reach collaboratively.
After reaching a decision through discussion and decision protocols, each agent is individually
challenged to reconsider their agreement with the group’s answer. They must decide whether to
maintain the decision or propose a new solution. This experiment aims to answer the following
questions:

How do language agents react when challenged in a multi-agent setting?
   1. How often do language agents change their decisions when challenged?
   2. Can challenging an answer improve task performance?

The challenge of the answer takes place with five different levels of access to information. All
agents are asked if they agree or disagree with the proposed solution. If they disagree, they have
to generate a new solution. In the first setting, only the generated solution is presented to the
agents. This is done to test whether the second setting, which provides the discussion history,
has an effect on the agreement with the solution. This would show that the reasoning within the
discussion can help convince the agent of the correctness of the answer. The third setting tests
whether providing additional information using the ContextPlus library makes it more or less likely
that the agents are convinced by the solution. The fourth and fifth approaches do not present the
discussed solution, but an incorrect and irrelevant solution generated using the QWEN 2 7B model
[49]. This allows to test if the model is able to find and correct obviously wrong solutions as a
baseline. The answers are generated using a different model than Llama 3, to remove any bias that
might occur if the same model used to detect the wrong answer also generated it [41]. Similarly to
the last experiment, all these experiments are run only on the StrategyQA, MMLU, MMLU-Pro,
and SQuAD 2.0 datasets due to limited computing resources.

Figure 12 shows the percentages of solutions challenged using all four data sets. If only the solution
is provided, around 20% of the agents challenge it. The only exception is the StrategyQA dataset,
with around 70% of solutions challenged. In the setting where the discussion history is provided, it
can be seen that agents are more likely to agree with only around 10% of the answers challenged.
This shows that providing the reasoning from the discussion helps to understand the solution and
makes it more likely that the agent is also agreeing with the solution. The StrategyQA dataset
had the greatest change as the challenge rate decreased by ∼ 60%. In this dataset, multi-agent
discussions had the best task performance improvements as seen in the first experiment (Section 4.1).
Therefore, a single agent will not agree with the solution as it lacks reasoning capabilities. By
providing the discussion history, the agent can understand the solution and is much more likely
to agree. The same trend can be seen for all other datasets, but not as pronounced as for the
StrategyQA dataset.




                                                  31
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                                      4. Experiments



                                                                 StrategyQA      MMLU        MMLU-Pro       SQuAD 2.0




       Percentage of Challenged Answers
                                          100%
                                           90%
                                           80%
                                           70%
                                           60%
                                           50%
                                           40%
                                           30%
                                           20%
                                           10%
                                            0%
                                                 Only Solution    Discussion History       Additional       Prompted Irrelevant   Prompted Wrong
                                                                                          Information            Answer               Answer

Figure 12: Percentage of agents challenging the final results after being presented with different
levels of information. The experiment was performed on the StrategyQA, MMLU, MMLU-Pro and
SQuAD 2.0 dataset.

If an irrelevant solution generated by the QWEN 2 model is proposed as the final solution, it can
be seen that the majority of agents decide to challenge the solution. If the model is deliberately
prompted to generate a wrong solution, the agents only challenge around 60% of the solutions
because sometimes the agents are tricked into believing the wrong solution. Only the SQuAD
2.0 dataset also achieves a challenge rate of 99.0%, since this is a free text task, making it much
easier to generate an incorrect solution. The StrategyQA dataset also has a higher challenge rate
of around 90%, which is consistent with the previous results.
                                                                 StrategyQA      MMLU        MMLU-Pro       SQuAD 2.0

                                           2%




       Percentage of Improved Answers
                                           0%

                                           -2%

                                           -4%

                                           -6%

                                           -8%

                                          -10%
                                                       Only Solution                   Discussion History               Additional Information

Figure 13: Percentage of answers that improve or worsen after being challenged using different
levels of information. The experiment was performed on the StrategyQA, MMLU, MMLU-Pro,
and SQuAD 2.0 datasets.

The percentages of improved answers can be seen in Figure 13. The task performance changes
are only presented for the first three cases in which only the answer, the discussion history, or




                                                                                        32
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   4. Experiments


additional information was provided since the other samples are only used as a baseline to validate
the challenge and show that the agents are capable of detecting wrong solutions. On average, there
are more samples that were changed to an incorrect solution than the other way around. For
StrategyQA and SQuAD 2.0 the performance dropped in around 3 − 6% of the samples. MMLU
and MMLU-Pro did not have significant changes compared to the discussion result.


4.4.1. Takeaways

  1. Impact of discussion history: Providing agents with the discussion history significantly
      reduces the likelihood that they challenge the solution, as it helps them understand the
      reasoning behind it.

  2. Challenging the final solution: Agents tend to challenge their decisions more often when
      presented with irrelevant or incorrect solutions, especially when they lack discussion history.

  3. Effectiveness of extra information: Adding additional context or information does not
      significantly improve the accuracy of agent decisions compared to just providing the discussion
      history.

  4. Performance changes after challenges: Challenging these final solutions with a single
      agent leads in the majority of cases to a decrease in task performance, as it lacks the
      multi-agent reasoning.


4.5. Compute Time
It is important to put all of these results in context by analyzing the needed compute time compared
to other methods. Only when compute times are reasonable compared to the expected performance
gain, multi-agent systems are feasible to exist in real-world applications. Multi-agent discussions are
inherently expensive as they require many messages from a LLM. They consist of multiple rounds
with multiple agents. Although the number of agents is fixed at the beginning of the discussion, the
number of rounds can scale dynamically depending on how fast the agents agree. This can result
in a significant increase in the required computing power compared to the baselines, as they only
require one response. All messages exchanged during the discussions also use CoT which results in
much longer responses. For this evaluation, the compute time from start to finish was recorded.
This is not a very accurate measure as the multi-agent responses could be stuck in a queue as many
discussions are processed simultaneously. This cannot happen for the baseline as they only require
one response. Therefore, it is necessary to exercise caution when interpreting these values.




                                                  33
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                          4. Experiments



                            3000

                            2500




  Compute Time in seconds
                            2000

                            1500

                            1000

                             500

                               0
                                      e
                                     lin         Ap prov
                                                               CO   T              dge       sus        us        sus
                                                          al Vo                   Ju        se          ns
                                Base          th   Sim  pl
                                                                 tin g                         n      se         se n
                                           wi Cu           eV ot  in                   yC          on        Co
                                        ne       mul at ive  Vo
                                                                     g                   on        yC           n
                                      se li       Ra nk
                                                                tin g                 rit       rit        ity
                                     Ba                  ed  Vo tin                ajo      m            im
                                                                     g            M          ajo        an
                                                                                         pe           Un
                                                                                            r
                                                                                       Su

Figure 14: Compute time for all decision protocols averaged over all datasets for the Llama 3 8B
model. Hardware is described in Section 3.1.2.

Figure 14 shows the computation time for each method averaged on all datasets for the Llama 3
8B model. There is already approximately ten times the computation cost for the baseline with
CoT compared to the single-agent baseline. The voting and judge decision protocols are the most
expensive, as they run on average for more discussion rounds and require an extra decision step.
The approval voting protocol is even more expensive, as it needs even more rounds to come to a
final decision. These protocols are approximately 15 times more expensive than the baseline with
CoT. The consensus-based decision protocols are much cheaper as they only require one to two
rounds to reach a decision. This corresponds to a five-fold increase in computation time.


4.5.1. Takeaways

   1. High Compute Cost of Multi-Agent Discussions: Multi-agent discussions require
                            significantly more computation due to multiple rounds and long responses.

   2. Costly Voting Protocols: Voting-based decision protocols are much more computationally
                            expensive compared to consensus-based ones, requiring more rounds and additional decision
                            steps.




                                                                    34
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                      5. Epilogue


5. Epilogue
5.1. Conclusion
In this work, I propose a collection of decision-making protocols for MAS. The efficiency of these
decision-making protocols is analyzed on seven different datasets from different domains, with a
smaller Llama 3 8B model and a larger Llama 3 70B model. All of these experiments are performed
using the framework MALLM, which was developed as part of this work and is fully open-source and
available to other researchers. It is capable of simulating multi-agent discussions for conversational
task-solving using a wide array of discussion protocols, response generators, and decision protocols.
To conclude the results of this study, in this section, I revisit the research questions that were
initially proposed.


How do decision-making mechanisms influence LLM performance in conversational tasks?
Overall, it can be seen that the decision protocols help to outperform the baselines. The consensus
decision protocols perform better on knowledge-based tasks, while the judge and voting decision
protocols are stronger on logic-based tasks. The size of the model has a strong impact on the
improvement gained from the multi-agent discussion. For the smaller Llama 3 8B each baseline
for a dataset is exceeded by a multi-agent discussion with a decision protocol. This changes for
the larger model, as it was not able to beat the baseline in some cases. It is also observed that
some decision protocols struggle to reach a final decision because the voting step has a high chance
of being tied. Therefore, more restrictive voting protocols are superior, as they help to reach a
decision.

Additional experiments show that limiting the number of rounds the agents have to discuss before
voting for a final decision can bring some improvements, as this decreases the chance that the
agents drift away from the main topic. By increasing the number of agents that collaborate on the
task, it could be seen that the task performance also increased. This is probably due to a wider
range of expertise.


How does the diversity of responses affect the performance of decision protocols?                This
experiment tests multiple methods to improve the diversity of responses. By forcing each agent to
start with its own solution and only iterate after that, an increase in task performance is observed.
An even greater improvement can be achieved by using the collective refinement discussion protocol,
which limits group influences and promotes independent thinking. These two methods show a
decrease in the similarity of the final responses. Forcing agents to share only reasoning steps or
answer hypercritically by changing the response generator did not have a positive impact on task
performance.



                                                 35
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                       5. Epilogue


How do small variations in information provided during the voting phase impact decision
protocols in multi-agent LLM systems? The alterations to the voting step have minimal impact
on task performance and often introduce a lot of computational overhead. There is no clear trend
as to which alteration performs best. The task performances for all decision protocols are within
one standard deviation of each other. Therefore, these small variations did not yield any significant
results.


How do language agents react when challenged in a multi-agent setting? The challenge
experiment demonstrates that the confidence of a language agent in their collaborative solution is
significantly influenced by the information available during the decision-making process. When
agents only receive the final solution, they are more likely to challenge it. In contrast, when agents
have access to the discussion history, they are less likely to challenge the consensus, as the reasoning
behind the decision helps build confidence in the solution. However, when presented with obviously
incorrect or irrelevant solutions, agents consistently challenged the proposed answer, with challenge
rates close to 100%. This highlights the agent’s ability to recognize and correct poor solutions.
Despite this, challenging the final decision in normal cases, where the solution was not deliberately
wrong, resulted in small performance decreases.


5.2. Future Work
An interesting future direction for this project is opening up with the emergence of newer and more
powerful models, especially in the area of reasoning skills. Models such as the OpenAI o1 preview9
or the QwQ-32B preview model[39], whose weights are even publicly available, allow the model to
use better reasoning because they are pre-trained on many successful CoT examples. This could
improve the voting steps, as they require more reasoning to determine which answers are right
and which are wrong. The judge decision protocol could benefit from these capabilities for the
same reasons. Overall, it would be interesting to compare the multi-agent discussion of these newer
reasoning pre-trained models with older generations of models with a similar number of parameters,
as this may provide insight into whether these newer models achieve a higher quality of discussion
and, therefore, a higher difference to their baseline task performance.

Applying the lessons learned from this study to improve the performance of decision protocols is
another interesting direction. Especially with the voting and judge-based decision protocols, there
is room for improvement. This could be done by allowing the agents to start voting earlier or create
a pre-vote to decide whether the majority of agents believe that they are ready for a decision. This
would still allow longer conversations for more complex tasks and reduce computing costs for the

 9
     openai.com/index/introducing-openai-o1-preview




                                                      36
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                     5. Epilogue


other cases. The compute cost could be further decreased by also limiting the answer length of the
agents. Overall, it can be observed that these agents tend to give long answers, which can pollute
the context of the other agents. By prompting the agents to repeat less information and answer
more concisely, the efficiency could be increased. It needs to be tested whether this leads to an
improvement or decrease in task performance.


5.3. Limitations
Due to the complex nature of multi-agent discussions and the high compute cost, it is not possible
to test all possible combinations of parameters. The default parameters and configurations for the
experiments can be found in Appendix C. By evaluating the decision protocols across a variety of
datasets from different domains, it was possible to determine whether these findings were universally
applicable or limited to specific tasks. This wide range of datasets further increased the parameter
space. Therefore, dataset sampling and calculating the standard deviation on three different runs
was used to estimate task performance as described in Section 3.2.

The calculation of compute time is not very accurate, as it also includes the wait time for the API.
The current results can only be seen as an approximation of the actual values. But as these are
calculated over many samples with all decision protocols using the same API and similar wait
times, it’s still comparable. Additionally, there are still some possible improvements that can be
applied to the voting and judge-based decision protocols as mentioned in Section 5.2. This could
close the gap in compute cost difference between these decision protocols and the consensus-based
decision protocols.




                                                 37
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   6. References


6. References
 [1]   Abdalla, M., Wahle, J. P., Ruas, T., et al., “The elephant in the room: Analyzing the presence
       of big tech in natural language processing research,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
       of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023. [Online].
       Available: https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.734.
 [2]   Bartholdi, J. J., Tovey, C. A., and Trick, M. A., “The computational difficulty of manipulating
       an election,” Social Choice and Welfare, no. 3, 1989, issn: 1432-217X. [Online]. Available:
       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00295861.
 [3]   Becker, J., Multi-Agent Large Language Models for Conversational Task-Solving, 2024. [Online].
       Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22932.
 [4]   Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,”
       in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neu-
       ral Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual,
       2020. [Online]. Available: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2020 / hash /
       1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
 [5]   Cecilia Navarra, Jančová, L., and Ioannides, I., Qualified majority voting in common foreign
       and security policy: a cost of non Europe report. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://data.
       europa.eu/doi/10.2861/509043.
 [6]   Chen, J. C.-Y., Saha, S., and Bansal, M., ReConcile: Round-Table Conference Improves
       Reasoning via Consensus among Diverse LLMs, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
       org/abs/2309.13007.
 [7]   Cochran, W. G., Sampling techniques (Sampling techniques). 1953.
 [8]   Dohmen, T., “Social Pressure Influences Decisions of Individuals: Evidence from the Behavior
       of Football Referees,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2005, issn: 1556-5068. [Online]. Available:
       https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=725541.
 [9]   Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Mordatch, I., Improving Factuality
       and Reasoning in Language Models through Multiagent Debate, 2023. [Online]. Available:
       https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325.
[10] Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., et al., The Llama 3 Herd of Models, 2024. [Online].
       Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
[11] Geva, M., Khashabi, D., Segal, E., Khot, T., Roth, D., and Berant, J., “Did aristotle use
       a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies,” Transac-
       tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. [Online]. Available: https :
       //aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.21.
[12] Gozi, S., “WORKING DOCUMENT on overcoming the deadlock of unanimity voting,”
       European Parliament, Committee on Constitutional Affairs, 2021.




                                                  38
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                    6. References


[13] Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., et al., “Measuring massive multitask language under-
      standing,” in 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual
      Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?
      id=d7KBjmI3GmQ.
[14] Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., et al., Measuring Mathematical Problem Solving
     With the MATH Dataset, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03874.
[15] Hong, S., Zhuge, M., Chen, J., et al., MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent
     Collaborative Framework, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.00352.
[16] Huang, J., Chen, X., Mishra, S., et al., Large Language Models Cannot Self-Correct Reasoning
     Yet, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01798.
[17] Jiang, H., Zhang, X., Cao, X., Breazeal, C., Roy, D., and Kabbara, J., “PersonaLLM:
      Investigating the ability of large language models to express personality traits,” in Findings
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, 2024. [Online]. Available:
      https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-naacl.229.
[18] Jones, B., “A comparison of consensus and voting in public decision making,” Negotiation
      Journal, no. 2, 1994, issn: 1571-9979. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
      BF02184175.
[19] Kim, J., Yang, N., and Jung, K., Persona is a Double-edged Sword: Mitigating the Negative
      Impact of Role-playing Prompts in Zero-shot Reasoning Tasks, 2024. [Online]. Available:
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08631.
[20] Levitan, L. C. and Verhulst, B., “Conformity in Groups: The Effects of Others’ Views on
      Expressed Attitudes and Attitude Change,” Political Behavior, no. 2, 2016, issn: 1573-6687.
      [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11109-015-9312-x.
[21] Li, J., Chen, J., Ren, R., et al., The Dawn After the Dark: An Empirical Study on Factuality
      Hallucination in Large Language Models, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
      abs/2401.03205.
[22] List, C., “Social Choice Theory,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2022,
      2022. [Online]. Available: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2022/entries/
      social-choice/.
[23] Liu, V. and Yin, Y., Green AI: Exploring Carbon Footprints, Mitigation Strategies, and Trade
     Offs in Large Language Model Training, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
      2404.01157.
[24] Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., et al., “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback,”
      in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
      Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December
     10 - 16, 2023, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper%5C_files/paper/
      2023/hash/91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Abstract-Conference.html.



                                                  39
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations               6. References


[25] Mallinson, D. J. and Hatemi, P. K., “The effects of information and social conformity
     on opinion change,” PLOS ONE, no. 5, 2018, issn: 1932-6203. [Online]. Available: https:
     //journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0196600.
[26] Minsky, M., “The Society of Mind,” The Personalist Forum, no. 1, 1987, issn: 0889-065X.
     [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20708493.
[27] Naveed, H., Khan, A. U., Qiu, S., et al., A Comprehensive Overview of Large Language
     Models, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.06435.
[28] OpenAI, Achiam, J., Adler, S., et al., GPT-4 Technical Report, 2023. [Online]. Available:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
[29] Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R., and Liang, P., “Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
     for SQuAD,” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.
     org/P18-2124.
[30] Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I., “Reporting score distributions makes a difference: Performance
     study of LSTM-networks for sequence tagging,” in Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
     on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
     //aclanthology.org/D17-1035.
[31] Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I., “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
     networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
     Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
     (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.
[32] Rein, D., Hou, B. L., Stickland, A. C., et al., GPQA: A Graduate-Level Google-Proof Q&A
     Benchmark, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022.
[33] Samuel, V., Zou, H. P., Zhou, Y., et al., PersonaGym: Evaluating Persona Agents and LLMs,
     2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18416.
[34] Sharma, M., Tong, M., Korbak, T., et al., Towards Understanding Sycophancy in Language
     Models, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13548.
[35] Shi, F., Chen, X., Misra, K., et al., “Large language models can be easily distracted by
     irrelevant context,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29
     July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2023.
     [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/shi23a.html.
[36] Snell, C., Lee, J., Xu, K., and Kumar, A., Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute Optimally
     can be More Effective than Scaling Model Parameters, 2024. [Online]. Available: https :
     //arxiv.org/abs/2408.03314.
[37] Sprague, Z., Ye, X., Bostrom, K., Chaudhuri, S., and Durrett, G., MuSR: Testing the
     Limits of Chain-of-thought with Multistep Soft Reasoning, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2310.16049.



                                               40
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                 6. References


[38] Sutskever, I. “The future of ai development.” (2024), [Online]. Available: https://www.
     theverge.com/2024/12/13/24320811/what-ilya-sutskever-sees-openai-model-data-
     training.
[39] Team, Q., QwQ: Reflect Deeply on the Boundaries of the Unknown, 2024. [Online]. Available:
     http://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwq-32b-preview/.
[40] Thompson, S. K., Sampling (Wiley series in probability and statistics), 3rd ed. 2012, isbn:
     978-0-470-40231-3.
[41] Wahle, J. P., Ruas, T., Meuschke, N., and Gipp, B., “Are Neural Language Models Good
     Plagiarists? A Benchmark for Neural Paraphrase Detection,” in 2021 ACM/IEEE Joint
     Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL), 2021, isbn: 978-1-66541-770-9. [Online]. Available:
     https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9651895/.
[42] Wang, Q., Wang, Z., Su, Y., Tong, H., and Song, Y., “Rethinking the Bounds of LLM
     Reasoning: Are Multi-Agent Discussions the Key?” In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
     Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
     [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.331.
[43] Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., et al., “Self-consistency improves chain of thought
     reasoning in language models,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
     resentations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
     //openreview.net/pdf?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
[44] Wang, Y., Ma, X., Zhang, G., et al., MMLU-Pro: A More Robust and Challenging Multi-
     Task Language Understanding Benchmark (Published at NeurIPS 2024 Track Datasets and
     Benchmarks), 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01574.
[45] Wang, Z., Mao, S., Wu, W., Ge, T., Wei, F., and Ji, H., “Unleashing the emergent cognitive syn-
     ergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-collaboration,”
     in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
     Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
     [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.15.
[46] Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
     large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
     Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans,
     LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.
     cc/paper%5C_files/paper/2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-
     Conference.html.
[47] Winter, J. d., Dodou, D., and Eisma, Y. B., “System 2 thinking in OpenAI’s o1-preview
     model: Near-perfect performance on a mathematics exam,” ArXiv preprint, 2024. [Online].
     Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07114.




                                                41
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations               6. References


[48] Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., et al., AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via
     Multi-Agent Conversation, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08155.
[49] Yang, A., Yang, B., Hui, B., et al., Qwen2 Technical Report, 2024. [Online]. Available:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10671.
[50] Yang, H., Wang, Y., Xu, X., Zhang, H., and Bian, Y., Can We Trust LLMs? Mitigate
     Overconfidence Bias in LLMs through Knowledge Transfer, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2405.16856.
[51] Yang, J. C., Korecki, M., Dailisan, D., Hausladen, C. I., and Helbing, D., LLM Voting: Human
     Choices and AI Collective Decision Making, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
     abs/2402.01766.
[52] Yin, Z., Sun, Q., Chang, C., et al., “Exchange-of-thought: Enhancing large language model
     capabilities through cross-model communication,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
     on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
     //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.936.
[53] Zheng, L., Chiang, W., Sheng, Y., et al., “Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chat-
     bot arena,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference
     on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA,
     December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper%5C_
     files/paper/2023/hash/91f18a1287b398d378ef22505bf41832-Abstract-Datasets%5C_
     and%5C_Benchmarks.html.
[54] Zhuge, M., Liu, H., Faccio, F., et al., Mindstorms in Natural Language-Based Societies of
     Mind, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17066.
[55] Zhuge, M., Wang, W., Kirsch, L., Faccio, F., Khizbullin, D., and Schmidhuber, J., Language
     Agents as Optimizable Graphs, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
     16823.




                                               42
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                  A. Results


A. Results
Additional results for all experiments to provide further information.


A.1. Alterations in Decision Protocols
             70.0%

             65.0%

             60.0%


  ACCURACY
             55.0%

             50.0%

             45.0%

             40.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 15: Mean task performance on the SQuAD 2.0 dataset for all voting and judge decision
protocols with all variations.

                                     Cumulative Voting       Ranked Voting    Simple Voting     Judge

             70.0%

             65.0%

             60.0%



  ACCURACY
             55.0%

             50.0%

             45.0%

             40.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 16: Task performance on the SQuAD 2.0 dataset for all voting and judge decision protocols
with all variations.




                                                                    i
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                   A. Results



             70.0%


             65.0%



  ACCURACY
             60.0%


             55.0%


             50.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob      Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence    Confidence    Information     History

Figure 17: Mean task performance on the MMLU dataset for all voting and judge decision
protocols with all variations.

                                     Cumulative Voting       Ranked Voting     Simple Voting     Judge

             70.0%



             65.0%




  ACCURACY
             60.0%



             55.0%



             50.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob      Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence    Confidence    Information     History

Figure 18: Task performance on the MMLU dataset for all voting and judge decision protocols
with all variations.




                                                                    ii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                                  A. Results



             50.0%

             45.0%

             40.0%


  ACCURACY
             35.0%

             30.0%

             25.0%

             20.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 19: Mean task performance on the MMLU-Pro dataset for all voting and judge decision
protocols with all variations.

                                     Cumulative Voting       Ranked Voting    Simple Voting     Judge

             50.0%

             45.0%

             40.0%



  ACCURACY
             35.0%

             30.0%

             25.0%

             20.0%
                     Anonymus   Public Voting     100%         Prompted       Logprob     Consistency    Additional   Discussion
                       Voting                   Confidence    Confidence     Confidence   Confidence    Information     History

Figure 20: Task performance on the MMLU-Pro dataset for all voting and judge decision protocols
with all variations.




                                                                   iii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                      A. Results


A.2. Turns until Decision
All tables for how many discussion rounds are needed to reach a decision for each dataset with a
Llama 3 8B and 70B model. The voting and judge decision protocols are forced to discuss for three
rounds, as Du et al. [9] showed that this yields good results.


A.2.1. 8B Model

 Group          Turn 1    Turn 2     Turn 3     Turn 4     Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting          0.00%     0.00%      98.17%     1.83%      0.00%            30.5 ± 0.9
 Cumulative      0.00%     0.00%      94.33%     5.50%      0.17%            31.3 ± 2.8
 Ranked          0.00%     0.00%      88.00%    10.67%      1.33%            27.3 ± 3.9
 Approval        0.00%     0.00%      36.67%    20.50%     42.83%            31.3 ± 2.6
 Judge           0.00%     0.00%     100.00%     0.00%      0.00%            27.6 ± 2.3
 Majority       78.00%     16.00%      4.50%     0.50%      1.00%            32.3 ± 2.9
 Supermaj.      77.83%     17.17%      3.83%     1.00%      0.17%            30.7 ± 2.1
 Unanimity      61.50%     20.50%     11.50%     3.00%      3.50%            30.0 ± 2.3

         Table 6: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol GPQA


 Group          Turn 1    Turn 2     Turn 3     Turn 4     Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting          0.00%     0.00%      99.33%     0.50%      0.17%            53.3 ± 1.8
 Cumulative      0.00%     0.00%      94.00%     5.50%      0.50%            52.6 ± 4.0
 Ranked          0.00%     0.00%      91.17%     7.83%      1.00%            49.2 ± 1.5
 Approval        0.00%     0.00%      26.67%    14.33%     59.00%            43.0 ± 2.1
 Judge           0.00%     0.00%     100.00%     0.00%      0.00%            53.7 ± 4.7
 Majority       80.00%     13.67%      4.83%     1.00%      0.50%            53.2 ± 2.5
 Supermaj.      79.33%     14.33%      4.83%     1.00%      0.50%            54.6 ± 3.6
 Unanimity      59.50%     21.67%     12.67%     3.50%      2.67%            54.2 ± 1.0

         Table 7: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MMLU




                                                 iv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                A. Results



 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    97.33%     2.67%     0.00%           32.0 ± 2.7
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    95.17%     4.67%     0.17%           28.3 ± 3.1
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    86.67%    10.83%     2.50%           33.1 ± 4.6
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    32.33%    19.00%    48.67%           29.2 ± 5.2
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            33.5 ± 0.8
 Majority      79.83%   15.83%     3.00%     0.50%    0.83%            36.4 ± 2.1
 Supermaj.     76.33%   17.33%     4.83%     1.00%    0.50%            35.2 ± 3.0
 Unanimity     59.67%   23.00%    11.17%     3.33%    2.83%            36.3 ± 0.4

      Table 8: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MMLU-Pro


 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    94.33%     5.50%     0.17%           58.5 ± 0.9
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    94.00%     6.00%     0.00%           61.2 ± 1.6
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    92.00%     7.50%     0.50%           56.2 ± 3.4
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    22.50%    11.00%    66.50%           58.7 ± 0.4
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            53.7 ± 2.0
 Majority      61.17%   30.00%     6.50%     1.67%    0.67%            59.9 ± 0.1
 Supermaj.     57.00%   33.50%     7.17%     1.50%    0.83%            56.4 ± 2.1
 Unanimity     30.33%   42.83%    18.67%     6.00%    2.17%            58.8 ± 2.6

      Table 9: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol StrategyQA


 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    99.67%     0.33%     0.00%           55.2 ± 1.5
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    94.88%     5.12%     0.00%           56.8 ± 4.2
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    89.33%     9.00%     1.67%           52.5 ± 0.0
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    28.50%    18.00%    53.50%           50.9 ± 4.0
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            59.3 ± 1.0
 Majority      71.33%   20.33%     5.67%     1.83%    0.83%            27.8 ± 2.5
 Supermaj.     68.33%   22.67%     6.50%     1.33%    1.17%            29.3 ± 2.6
 Unanimity     38.83%   31.83%    19.17%     6.00%    4.17%            28.2 ± 2.8

         Table 10: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MuSR




                                             v
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                 A. Results



 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    99.17%     0.83%     0.00%            56.2 ± 0.5
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    96.33%     3.50%     0.17%            55.8 ± 3.4
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    93.00%     6.17%     0.83%            58.0 ± 0.8
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    32.50%    13.67%    53.83%            46.5 ± 1.4
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             57.2 ± 0.6
 Majority      81.83%   11.33%     3.67%     1.67%    1.50%             43.1 ± 2.1
 Supermaj.     82.00%   10.33%     4.67%     1.33%    1.67%             44.4 ± 0.4
 Unanimity     66.83%   16.00%     8.83%     4.17%    4.17%             43.4 ± 2.0

      Table 11: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol SQuAD 2.0


 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    96.50%     3.50%     0.00%            9.5 ± 1.7
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    95.17%     4.50%     0.33%            9.0 ± 1.5
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    89.50%     9.33%     1.17%            6.8 ± 1.3
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    59.83%    23.83%    16.33%            7.8 ± 2.6
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             9.2 ± 3.0
 Majority      62.83%   29.33%     4.67%     1.67%    1.50%             9.2 ± 3.0
 Supermaj.     64.67%   27.67%     5.50%     0.83%    1.33%             9.2 ± 0.8
 Unanimity     42.33%   34.83%    15.33%     3.83%    3.67%             10.8 ± 1.6

      Table 12: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol Math lvl 5

A.2.2. 70B Model

 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    99.21%     0.73%    0.06%             45.7 ± 0.3
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    94.33%     5.33%    0.33%             43.9 ± 3.1
 Ranked          0%        0%     89.71%     8.11%     2.18%            44.2 ± 2.1
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%     7.35%     3.71%    88.94%            33.0 ± 3.4
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             42.9 ± 5.1
 Majority      62.33%   31.67%     5.67%     0.33%    0.00%             43.7 ± 1.0
 Supermaj.     66.17%   28.50%     4.67%     0.67%    0.00%             46.6 ± 0.8
 Unanimity     34.33%   45.83%    15.67%     3.33%    0.83%             45.3 ± 2.5

         Table 13: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol GPQA




                                            vi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                 A. Results



 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting         0.00%    0.00%    98.50%     1.50%    0.00%            75.5 ± 1.3
 Cumulative     0.00%    0.00%    95.50%     4.17%    0.33%            72.5 ± 1.9
 Ranked         0.00%    0.00%    98.00%     1.50%    0.50%            73.3 ± 1.9
 Approval       0.00%    0.00%     7.83%     3.00%    89.17%           50.2 ± 2.1
 Judge          0.00%    0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            72.2 ± 1.4
 Majority      87.67%   10.33%     1.67%     0.00%    0.33%            74.0 ± 1.4
 Supermaj.     87.17%   11.17%     1.67%     0.00%    0.00%            71.9 ± 1.2
 Unanimity     67.50%   23.17%     7.00%     1.33%    1.00%            72.2 ± 2.4

         Table 14: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MMLU


 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting         0.00%    0.00%    98.83%     1.00%    0.17%            56.5 ± 5.4
 Cumulative     0.00%    0.00%    92.67%     6.17%    1.17%            53.0 ± 0.4
 Ranked         0.00%    0.00%    97.00%     2.83%    0.17%            54.3 ± 0.9
 Approval       0.00%    0.00%    12.00%     5.00%    83.00%           36.3 ± 3.7
 Judge          0.00%    0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            58.0 ± 3.9
 Majority      87.83%   10.83%     0.67%     0.33%    0.33%            57.3 ± 3.0
 Supermaj.     85.83%   12.00%     1.50%     0.33%    0.33%            57.0 ± 1.7
 Unanimity     62.50%   28.67%     6.83%     1.00%    1.00%            57.3 ± 1.5

      Table 15: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MMLU-Pro


 Group         Turn 1   Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting         0.00%    0.00%    99.17%     0.83%    0.00%            81.2 ± 1.4
 Cumulative     0.00%    0.00%    92.17%     3.33%    4.50%            80.0 ± 0.8
 Ranked         0.00%    0.00%    98.50%     1.17%    0.33%            80.3 ± 1.0
 Approval       0.00%    0.00%    12.33%     1.83%    85.83%           46.4 ± 13.9
 Judge          0.00%    0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%            82.9 ± 1.3
 Majority      89.17%    9.17%     1.50%     0.17%    0.00%            80.1 ± 0.3
 Supermaj.     89.83%    8.17%     1.67%     0.17%    0.17%            80.3 ± 1.3
 Unanimity     73.33%   18.17%     6.00%     1.50%    1.00%            78.1 ± 2.3

      Table 16: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol StrategyQA




                                            vii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                 A. Results



 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    97.00%     2.83%    0.17%            59.3 ± 3.0
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    97.17%     2.67%    0.17%            60.0 ± 1.7
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    98.33%     1.67%    0.00%            59.5 ± 0.5
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%     4.17%     2.50%    93.33%           49.1 ± 12.4
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             64.2 ± 1.0
 Majority      86.33%    8.67%     2.00%     1.17%    1.83%             61.3 ± 3.3
 Supermaj.     85.83%    9.50%     1.83%     1.17%    1.67%             60.2 ± 0.3
 Unanimity     74.00%   13.17%     7.17%     2.50%    3.17%             61.3 ± 0.8

         Table 17: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol MuSR


 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    99.50%     0.50%    0.00%             69.5 ± 0.5
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    94.33%     4.83%    0.83%             69.7 ± 1.1
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    99.83%     0.17%    0.00%             70.6 ± 1.1
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%     6.17%     2.83%    91.00%            24.3 ± 5.0
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             65.7 ± 1.1
 Majority      98.33%    1.67%     0.00%     0.00%    0.00%             58.2 ± 1.0
 Supermaj.     97.00%    2.50%     0.00%     0.17%    0.33%             54.3 ± 1.9
 Unanimity     86.83%   11.33%     1.67%     0.00%    0.17%             56.7 ± 2.2

      Table 18: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol SQuAD 2.0


 Group        Turn 1    Turn 2    Turn 3    Turn 4    Turn 5   Task Performance Score
 Voting        0.00%     0.00%    98.83%     1.17%     0.00%            12.0 ± 0.9
 Cumulative    0.00%     0.00%    71.00%    17.67%    11.33%            11.9 ± 2.4
 Ranked        0.00%     0.00%    98.67%     1.17%     0.17%            12.0 ± 1.3
 Approval      0.00%     0.00%    32.33%    16.83%    50.83%            7.9 ± 2.3
 Judge         0.00%     0.00%    100.00%    0.00%    0.00%             19.2 ± 0.6
 Majority      92.50%    7.17%     0.00%     0.00%    0.33%             23.2 ± 3.3
 Supermaj.     90.67%    8.67%     0.33%     0.00%    0.33%             25.7 ± 2.4
 Unanimity     66.50%   30.50%     2.33%     0.17%    0.50%             20.7 ± 1.5

      Table 19: Termination Percentage by Turn for Each Decision Protocol Math lvl 5




                                            viii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                        A. Results


A.3. Challenge Results
                  No Challenge     Same Score   Higher Score    Lower Score      Failed

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
           Only Answer     Discussion History    Additional    Prompted Irrelevant   Prompted Wrong
                                                Information         Answer               Answer

Figure 21: Percentage of agents challenging the answer for the MMLU dataset. If the answer is
challenged the result is compared to the previous answer which results in a higher, lower or same
score. If the agent generates an unusable answer, the challenge failed.

                  No Challenge     Same Score   Higher Score    Lower Score      Failed

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
           Only Answer     Discussion History    Additional    Prompted Irrelevant   Prompted Wrong
                                                Information         Answer               Answer

Figure 22: Percentage of agents challenging the answer for the MMLU-Pro dataset. If the answer
is challenged the result is compared to the previous answer which results in a higher, lower or same
score. If the agent generates an unusable answer, the challenge failed.




                                                 ix
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                        A. Results



                  No Challenge     Same Score   Higher Score    Lower Score      Failed

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
           Only Answer     Discussion History    Additional    Prompted Irrelevant   Prompted Wrong
                                                Information         Answer               Answer

Figure 23: Percentage of agents challenging the answer for the StrategyQA dataset. If the answer
is challenged the result is compared to the previous answer which results in a higher, lower or same
score. If the agent generates an unusable answer, the challenge failed.

                  No Challenge     Same Score   Higher Score    Lower Score      Failed

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
           Only Answer     Discussion History    Additional    Prompted Irrelevant   Prompted Wrong
                                                Information         Answer               Answer

Figure 24: Percentage of agents challenging the answer for the SQuAD 2.0 dataset. If the answer
is challenged the result is compared to the previous answer which results in a higher, lower or same
score. If the agent generates an unusable answer, the challenge failed.




                                                 x
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                    B. Prompts


B. Prompts
B.1. Final Answer Extraction

   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   You are tasked with creating a final solution based on the given input and your previous
   response.
   Task: <task>
   Input: <input sample>
   Your previous response: <previous answer>
   Extract the final solution to the task from the provided text. Remove statements of
   agreement, disagreement, and explanations. Do not modify the text. Do not output any
   text besides the solution. If there is no solution provided, just copy the previous response.


Figure 25: Prompt used to extract the final answer of a given agent from its previous response.


B.2. Voting Prompts
   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   You are tasked with voting for the best solution from the list provided below based on the
   given task.
   Task: <task>
   Question: <input sample>
   Here are the possible solutions:
   Solution 1: <agent 1 final answer>
   Solution 2: <agent 2 final answer>
   Solution 3: <agent 3 final answer>
   Based on the above solutions, please provide the number of the solution you are voting for.
   Answer only with the number.


Figure 26: Prompt used to get a vote from each agent for the Simple Voting decision protocol.
No alterations are applied.




                                                xi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                   B. Prompts



   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   You are tasked with approving any number of solutions from the list provided below based
   on the given task.
   Task: <task>
   Question: <input sample>
   Here are the possible solutions:
   Solution 1: <agent 1 final answer>
   Solution 2: <agent 2 final answer>
   Solution 3: <agent 3 final answer>
   Based on the above solutions, please provide the numbers of the solutions you are approving,
   separated by commas. Answer only with the numbers.


Figure 27: Prompt used to get a vote from each agent for the Approval Voting decision protocol.
No alterations are applied.

   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   You are tasked with distributing 10 points among the provided solutions based on the given
   task.
   Task: <task>
   Question: <input sample>
   Here are the possible solutions:
   Solution 1: <agent 1 final answer>
   Solution 2: <agent 2 final answer>
   Solution 3: <agent 3 final answer>
   Based on the above solutions, please distribute 10 points among the solutions. Provide
   your points allocation as a JSON dictionary where keys are solution numbers (as int) and
   values are the points. The total points should sum up to 10. Answer only with the JSON
   dictionary.


Figure 28: Prompt used to get a vote from each agent for the Cumulative Voting decision protocol.
No alterations are applied.




                                               xii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                B. Prompts



   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   You are tasked with ranking the solutions from the most preferred to the least preferred
   based on the given task.
   Task: <task>
   Question: <input sample>
   Here are the possible solutions:
   Solution 1: <agent 1 final answer>
   Solution 2: <agent 2 final answer>
   Solution 3: <agent 3 final answer>
   Based on the above solutions, please provide the rankings of the solutions separated by
   spaces. Example: ’0 2 1’ if you prefer Solution 0 the most, then Solution 2, and finally
   Solution 1. Provide up to 5 rankings. Only answer with the rankings.


Figure 29: Prompt used to get a vote from each agent for the Ranked Voting decision protocol.
No alterations are applied.


B.3. Judge Prompt
   User Prompt:
   Task: <task>
   Question: <input sample>
   Please provide a decision on the following solutions and combine them in a single answer
   to solve the task. Only answer with the solution:
   Solution 1: <agent 1 final answer>
   Solution 2: <agent 2 final answer>
   Solution 3: <agent 3 final answer>


Figure 30: Prompt used to get a final decision from the Judge decision protocol. No alterations
are applied.




                                             xiii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                 B. Prompts


B.4. Confidence Prompt
   System Prompt:
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   The task is: <task>. The question is: <input sample>. This is the final answer you
   provided: <final answer>. Based on this information, please generate a confidence score
   between 0 and 100 for the final answer. Be critical and only answer with the number.


Figure 31: Prompt used to get a confidence score from each agent for the voting alterations
experiment.


B.5. Challenge Prompt
   System Prompt:
   You are a participant in a group discussion.
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   The task is: <task>. The question is: <question>.
   This is the final answer generated by the discussion: <final answer>.
    Please critically evaluate this answer. If you agree with the final answer, respond with
    the exact word ’AGREE’ to confirm. If you do not agree, respond with the exact word
   ’DISAGREE’ to challenge the answer.


                    Figure 32: Prompt used to challenge the final answer.

   System Prompt:
   You are a participant in a group discussion.
   Your role: <persona> (<persona description>)
   User Prompt:
   The task is: <task>. The question is: <question>.
   This is the final answer generated by the discussion: <final answer>.
   You dont agree with the final answer. Please provide a new answer to the question. Include
   the letter corresponding to your answer in the solution.


  Figure 33: Prompt used to generate a new answer in case the final answer got challenged.




                                              xiv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations         C. MALLM Setup


C. MALLM Setup
C.1. MALLM Default Parameters
input_json_file_path: str = None
output_json_file_path: str = None
task_instruction_prompt: str = None
task_instruction_prompt_template: Optional[str] = None
endpoint_url: str = "https://api.openai.com/v1"
model_name: str = "gpt-3.5-turbo"
api_key: str = "-"
max_turns: int = 10
skip_decision_making: bool = False
discussion_paradigm: str = "memory"
response_generator: str = "simple"
decision_protocol: str = "hybrid_consensus"
visible_turns_in_memory: int = 2
debate_rounds: int = 2
concurrent_api_requests: int = 100
use_baseline: bool = False
use_chain_of_thought: bool = True
num_agents: int = 3
num_neutral_agents: int = 0
agent_generator: str = "expert"
agent_generators_list: list = []
trust_remote_code: bool = False
num_samples: Optional[int] = None
hf_dataset_split: Optional[str] = "test"
hf_token: Optional[str] = None
hf_dataset_version: Optional[str] = None
hf_dataset_input_column: Optional[str] = None
hf_dataset_reference_column: Optional[str] = None
hf_dataset_context_column: Optional[str] = None
use_ablation: bool = False
shuffle_input_samples: bool = False
all_agents_generate_first_draft: bool = False
all_agents_generate_draft: bool = False
policy: Optional[str] = None
voting_protocols_with_alterations: bool = False
calculate_persona_diversity: bool = False

                    Listing 1: Default Parameters used for each experiment




                                                xv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations              C. MALLM Setup


C.2. MALLM Experiment Batch Files
To replicate the results of this study, modify the batch files for your specific dataset and execute
them with the following command:


                           mallm-batch <PATH TO BATCH FILE>

After running this command, you can evaluate the results using:


           mallm-evaluate –metrics [<METRIC FOR DATASET>, ...] ./results


C.2.1. Decision Protocol Experiments
{
    "repeats": 3,
    "name": "<DATASET NAME>",
    "common": {
      "task_instruction_prompt_template": "<DATASET NAME>",
      "endpoint_url": "<LLM API HOSTNAME>",
      "api_key": "<LLM API KEY>",
      "model_name": "<MODEL NAME>",
      "input_json_file_path": "data/datasets/<DATASET NAME>.json",
      "concurrent_api_requests": 200,
      "num_samples": <SAMPLES FOR DATASET>,
      "max_turns": 5,
      "response_generator":"simple"
    },
    "runs": [
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/baseline-cot.json",
         "use_baseline": true
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/baseline.json",
         "use_baseline": true,
         "use_chain_of_thought": false
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/approval.json",
         "decision_protocol": "approval_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/cumulative.json",




                                                 xvi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations             C. MALLM Setup


             "decision_protocol": "cumulative_voting"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/hybrid_consensus.json",
             "decision_protocol": "hybrid_consensus"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/majority_consensus.json",
             "decision_protocol": "majority_consensus"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/supermajority_consensus.json",
             "decision_protocol": "supermajority_consensus"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/unanimity_consensus.json",
             "decision_protocol": "unanimity_consensus"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voting.json",
             "decision_protocol": "simple_voting"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/ranked.json",
             "decision_protocol": "ranked_voting"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/summary.json",
             "decision_protocol": "summary"
        }
    ]
}

                           Listing 2: MALLM batch config used for Experiment 1




                                                        xvii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations   C. MALLM Setup




{
    "repeats": 3,
    "name": "<DATASET NAME>",
    "common": {
      "task_instruction_prompt_template": "<DATASET NAME>",
      "endpoint_url": "<LLM API HOSTNAME>",
      "api_key": "<LLM API KEY>",
      "model_name": "<MODEL NAME>",
      "input_json_file_path": "data/datasets/<DATASET NAME>.json",
      "concurrent_api_requests": 200,
      "num_samples": <SAMPLES FOR DATASET>,
      "max_turns": 10,
      "response_generator":"simple",
      "visible_turns_in_memory": 10,
      "decision_protocol": "simple_voting",
      "all_agents_generate_first_draft": true
    },
    "runs": [
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents1.json",
         "num_agents": 1
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents2.json",
         "num_agents": 2
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents3.json",
         "num_agents": 3
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents4.json",
         "num_agents": 4
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents5.json",
         "num_agents": 5
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents6.json",
         "num_agents": 6
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/agents7.json",
         "num_agents": 7




                                                 xviii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations         C. MALLM Setup


        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/agents8.json",
             "num_agents": 8
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/agents9.json",
             "num_agents": 9
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/agents10.json",
             "num_agents": 10
        }
    ]
}

Listing 3: MALLM batch config used for Experiment 1 to evaluate difference in task performance
for varying number of agents

{
    "repeats": 3,
    "name": "<DATASET NAME>",
    "common": {
      "task_instruction_prompt_template": "<DATASET NAME>",
      "endpoint_url": "<LLM API HOSTNAME>",
      "api_key": "<LLM API KEY>",
      "model_name": "<MODEL NAME>",
      "input_json_file_path": "data/datasets/<DATASET NAME>.json",
      "concurrent_api_requests": 200,
      "num_samples": <SAMPLES FOR DATASET>,
      "max_turns": 10,
      "response_generator":"simple",
      "visible_turns_in_memory": 10,
      "decision_protocol": "simple_voting"
    },
    "runs": [
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn1.json",
         "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 1
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn2.json",
         "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 2
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn3.json",




                                                      xix
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations         C. MALLM Setup


             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 3
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn4.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 4
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn5.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 5
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn6.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 6
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn7.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 7
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn8.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 8
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn9.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 9
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voteturn10.json",
             "voting_protocols_vote_turn": 10
        }
    ]
}

Listing 4: MALLM batch config used for Experiment 1 to evaluate difference in task performance
for round that voting is allowed




                                                       xx
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations        C. MALLM Setup


C.2.2. Decision Alterations Experiments
{
    "repeats": 3,
    "name": "<DATASET NAME>",
    "common": {
      "task_instruction_prompt_template": "<DATASET NAME>",
      "endpoint_url": "<LLM API HOSTNAME>",
      "api_key": "<LLM API KEY>",
      "model_name": "<MODEL NAME>",
      "input_json_file_path": "data/datasets/<DATASET NAME>.json",
      "concurrent_api_requests": 200,
      "num_samples": <SAMPLES FOR DATASET>,
      "max_turns": 5,
      "response_generator":"simple"
      "voting_protocols_with_alterations":true
    },
    "runs": [
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/approval.json",
         "decision_protocol": "approval_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/cumulative.json",
         "decision_protocol": "cumulative_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/voting.json",
         "decision_protocol": "simple_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/ranked.json",
         "decision_protocol": "ranked_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/summary.json",
         "decision_protocol": "summary"
      }
    ]
}

                      Listing 5: MALLM batch config used for Experiment 2




                                                 xxi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations        C. MALLM Setup


C.2.3. Final Answer Challenge Experiments
{
    "repeats": 3,
    "name": "<DATASET NAME>",
    "common": {
      "task_instruction_prompt_template": "<DATASET NAME>",
      "endpoint_url": "<LLM API HOSTNAME>",
      "api_key": "<LLM API KEY>",
      "model_name": "<MODEL NAME>",
      "input_json_file_path": "data/datasets/<DATASET NAME>.json",
      "concurrent_api_requests": 200,
      "num_samples": <SAMPLES FOR DATASET>,
      "max_turns": 5,
      "response_generator":"simple",
      "challenge_final_results": true
    },
    "runs": [
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/baseline-cot.json",
         "use_baseline": true
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/baseline.json",
         "use_baseline": true,
         "use_chain_of_thought": false
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/approval.json",
         "decision_protocol": "approval_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/cumulative.json",
         "decision_protocol": "cumulative_voting"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/hybrid_consensus.json",
         "decision_protocol": "hybrid_consensus"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/majority_consensus.json",
         "decision_protocol": "majority_consensus"
      },
      {
         "output_json_file_path": "results/supermajority_consensus.json",
         "decision_protocol": "supermajority_consensus"




                                                  xxii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations             C. MALLM Setup


        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/unanimity_consensus.json",
             "decision_protocol": "unanimity_consensus"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/voting.json",
             "decision_protocol": "simple_voting"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/ranked.json",
             "decision_protocol": "ranked_voting"
        },
        {
             "output_json_file_path": "results/summary.json",
             "decision_protocol": "summary"
        }
    ]
}

                           Listing 6: MALLM batch config used for Experiment 3




                                                      xxiii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                          D. Example Discussions


D. Example Discussions
D.1. Successfull Voting Discussion
All voting and judge decision protocols are attached as an example to this discussion. The original
discussion was created using simple voting.


   Overview
   Task: Answer the following question. If the question is not answerable with the provided
   information, write ’[UNKNOWN]’.
   Input: What choir from the area has sung at the Guildhall?
   Context: Southampton has two large live music venues, the Mayflower Theatre (formerly the
   Gaumont Theatre) and the Guildhall. The Guildhall has seen concerts from a wide range of
   popular artists including Pink Floyd, David Bowie, Delirious?, Manic Street Preachers, The
   Killers, The Kaiser Chiefs, Amy Winehouse, Lostprophets, The Midnight Beast, Modestep,
   and All Time Low. It also hosts classical concerts presented by the Bournemouth Symphony
   Orchestra, City of Southampton Orchestra, Southampton Concert Orchestra, Southampton
   Philharmonic Choir and Southampton Choral Society.

      MALLM solution: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
      Real solution: Southampton Philharmonic Choir


   Turn 1

      Music Connoisseur            A knowledgeable musician who is familiar with various music genres and has attended
      concerts at the Guildhall.


      Based on the information provided, I propose the following solution:
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir.
      The text states: ”It also hosts classical concerts presented by the Bournemouth Sym-
      phony Orchestra, City of Southampton Orchestra, Southampton Concert Orchestra,
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton Choral Society.” This suggests
      that the Southampton Philharmonic Choir is one of the choirs that has performed at
      the Guildhall, as it is mentioned alongside the other organizations that host classical
      concerts at the venue.




                                                      xxiv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                      D. Example Discussions




      Choir Conductor                A dedicated choral conductor with extensive experience in leading local choirs and orchestras,
      familiar with the performances at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      I agree with the current solution that the Southampton Philharmonic Choir has sung
      at the Guildhall. The text explicitly mentions it as one of the organizations that hosts
      classical concerts at the Guildhall, which indicates that the choir has performed at
      the venue.

      Music Journalist A music enthusiast who has written articles and reviews about various concerts and events at the
      Guildhall, including performances by local choirs.


      [AGREE]
      I completely agree with the current solution. The text explicitly mentions the
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir as one of the organizations that hosts classical
      concerts at the Guildhall, making it the most likely choice.


  Turn 2

      Music Connoisseur                      A knowledgeable musician who is familiar with various music genres and has attended
      concerts at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      I’m in agreement with the current solution, as the text explicitly mentions the
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir as one of the organizations that hosts classical
      concerts at the Guildhall. This makes it the most likely candidate to have sung at the
      venue.

      Choir Conductor                A dedicated choral conductor with extensive experience in leading local choirs and orchestras,
      familiar with the performances at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      I agree with the current solution that the Southampton Philharmonic Choir has sung
      at the Guildhall. The text explicitly mentions it as one of the organizations that hosts
      classical concerts at the Guildhall, which indicates that the choir has performed at
      the venue.




                                                                 xxv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                      D. Example Discussions




      Music Journalist A music enthusiast who has written articles and reviews about various concerts and events at the
      Guildhall, including performances by local choirs.


      [AGREE]
      I completely agree with the current solution. The text explicitly mentions the
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir as one of the organizations that hosts classical
      concerts at the Guildhall, making it the most likely choice.


  Turn 3

      Music Connoisseur                      A knowledgeable musician who is familiar with various music genres and has attended
      concerts at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      I agree with the current solution and the assessment that there is no need to improve
      it. The text provides explicit evidence that the Southampton Philharmonic Choir
      hosts classical concerts at the Guildhall, making it the most likely correct answer.

      Choir Conductor                A dedicated choral conductor with extensive experience in leading local choirs and orchestras,
      familiar with the performances at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      I agree with the current solution that the Southampton Philharmonic Choir has sung
      at the Guildhall. The text explicitly mentions it as one of the organizations that hosts
      classical concerts at the Guildhall, which indicates that the choir has performed at
      the venue.

      Music Journalist A music enthusiast who has written articles and reviews about various concerts and events at the
      Guildhall, including performances by local choirs.


      [AGREE]
      I completely agree with the current solution. The text explicitly mentions the
      Southampton Philharmonic Choir as one of the organizations that hosts classical
      concerts at the Guildhall, making it the most likely choice.




                                                                 xxvi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations   D. Example Discussions



   Result Simple Voting

   Music Connoisseur final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Choir Conductor final answer: Southampton Choral Society
   Music Journalist final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir

   Music Connoisseur voted for answer from Music Journalist
   Choir Conductor voted for answer from Music Journalist
   Music Journalist voted for answer from Music Journalist

   Result Cumulative Voting

   Local Music Enthusiast final answer: Southampton Choral Society
   Southampton Philharmonic Choir
  Archivist final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Southampton Choral Society
   Music Journalist final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton
   Choral Society

   Local Music Enthusiast allocated points:
  Archivist: 9
   Music Journalist: 1

  Archivist allocated points:
   Local Music Enthusiast: 2
  Archivist: 4
   Music Journalist: 4

   Music Journalist allocated points:
   Local Music Enthusiast: 1
  Archivist: 2
   Music Journalist: 7




                                           xxvii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations   D. Example Discussions



   Result Approval Voting

   Music Critic final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Local Music Event Coordinator final answer: Southampton Choral Society and
   Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Information Architect final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Southampton Choral Society

   Music Critic approved answers from Information Architect, Music Critic
   Local Music Event Coordinator approved answers from Information Architect
   Information Architect approved answers from Information Architect

   Result Ranked Voting

   Music Journalist final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton
   Choral Society.
   Local Music Expert final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton
   Choral Society
   Concert Promoter final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton
   Choral Society

   Music Journalist ranked answers:
  1. Music Journalist
   2. Local Music Expert
   3. Concert Promoter

   Local Music Expert ranked answers:
  1. Music Journalist
   2. Local Music Expert
   3. Concert Promoter

   Concert Promoter ranked answers:
  1. Music Journalist
   2. Local Music Expert
   3. Concert Promoter




                                           xxviii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations   D. Example Discussions



   Result Judge

   Local Music Enthusiast final answer: Southampton Choral Society
   Music Researcher final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir
   Promoter final answer: Southampton Philharmonic Choir

   Judge created new solution: Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton Choral
   Society




                                           xxix
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations          D. Example Discussions


D.2. Agents Tricked Discussion
In this discussion, the agents were tricked by information provided in the context.


   Overview
   Task: Answer the following question. If the question is not answerable with the provided
   information, write ’[UNKNOWN]’.
   Input: What provides critical support for drug discovery and the availability of economic
   resources?
   Context: Biodiversity provides critical support for drug discovery and the availability of
   medicinal resources. A significant proportion of drugs are derived, directly or indirectly, from
   biological sources: at least 50% of the pharmaceutical compounds on the US market are
   derived from plants, animals, and micro-organisms, while about 80% of the world population
   depends on medicines from nature (used in either modern or traditional medical practice)
   for primary healthcare. Only a tiny fraction of wild species has been investigated for
   medical potential. Biodiversity has been critical to advances throughout the field of bionics.
   Evidence from analysis and biodiversity science indicates that the decline in output from the
   pharmaceutical sector since the mid-1980s can be attributed to a move away from natural
   product exploration (”bioprospecting”) in favor of genomics and synthetic chemistry, indeed
   claims about the value of undiscovered pharmaceuticals may not provide enough incentive
   for companies in free markets to search for them because of the high cost of development;
   meanwhile, natural products have a long history of supporting significant economic and
   health innovation. Marine ecosystems are particularly important, although inappropriate
   bioprospecting can increase biodiversity loss, as well as violating the laws of the communities
   and states from which the resources are taken.

      MALLM solution: Biodiversity provides critical support for drug discovery and the
      availability of economic resources.
      Real solution: Not included in context!




                                                 xxx
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions



  Turn 1

      Economist A researcher who studies the impact of biodiversity on economic systems, with expertise in market analysis
      and the economic benefits of natural resources.


      As an economist, I’d like to propose a solution that addresses the decline in output from
      the pharmaceutical sector since the mid-1980s and leverages the untapped potential
      of biodiversity for drug discovery and economic innovation.
      Here’s a multi-faceted approach:
     **Solution:** Establish a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) to incentivize the ex-
      ploration and development of natural products for pharmaceuticals, while ensuring
      responsible and sustainable bioprospecting practices.

      Ethnobotanist A scientist who studies the traditional uses of plants by indigenous communities and their potential
      for medicinal applications, with expertise in deciphering the cultural and historical context of natural resources.


      As an ethnobotanist, I agree with the current solution in principle. The Public-Private
      Partnership (PPP) framework has the potential to bring together the necessary
      stakeholders and incentivize the exploration and development of natural products for
      pharmaceuticals while ensuring responsible and sustainable bioprospecting practices.
      The multistep approach outlined is comprehensive and addresses various aspects of
      the issue.

      Research Biologist               A scientist who studies the properties and potential applications of natural products from a
      wide range of living organisms, with expertise in the discovery and development of new medicines from biodiversity sources.


      I, as a Research Biologist, AGREE with the current solution and the additional
      suggestions proposed by the Ethnobotanist. The Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
      framework is a well-rounded approach that addresses the decline in output from
      the pharmaceutical sector by providing a framework for responsible and sustainable
      bioprospecting, while promoting economic innovation and job creation.
      I particularly appreciate the emphasis on community engagement and empowerment,
      benefit-sharing agreements, traditional knowledge protection, and capacity building
      for ecosystem-based medicine.




                                                                  xxxi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions



  Turn 2

      Economist A researcher who studies the impact of biodiversity on economic systems, with expertise in market analysis
      and the economic benefits of natural resources.


      The current solution has been improved with additional considerations from the
      ethnobotanist and research biologist. I notice that the additional suggestions enhance
      the comprehensive approach, addressing community engagement, benefit-sharing, and
      traditional knowledge protection.

      Ethnobotanist A scientist who studies the traditional uses of plants by indigenous communities and their potential
      for medicinal applications, with expertise in deciphering the cultural and historical context of natural resources.


      As an ethnobotanist, I agree with the current solution in principle. The Public-Private
      Partnership (PPP) framework has the potential to bring together the necessary
      stakeholders and incentivize the exploration and development of natural products for
      pharmaceuticals while ensuring responsible and sustainable bioprospecting practices.
      The multistep approach outlined is comprehensive and addresses various aspects of
      the issue.

      Research Biologist               A scientist who studies the properties and potential applications of natural products from a
      wide range of living organisms, with expertise in the discovery and development of new medicines from biodiversity sources.


      I, as a Research Biologist, AGREE with the current solution and the additional
      suggestions proposed by the Ethnobotanist. The Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
      framework is a well-rounded approach that addresses the decline in output from
      the pharmaceutical sector by providing a framework for responsible and sustainable
      bioprospecting, while promoting economic innovation and job creation.
      I particularly appreciate the emphasis on community engagement and empowerment,
      benefit-sharing agreements, traditional knowledge protection, and capacity building for
      ecosystem-based medicine. These considerations will ensure that local communities are
      involved in the decision-making process, receive fair compensation for their involvement,
      and that their traditional knowledge and cultural heritage are respected.




                                                                  xxxii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions



  Turn 3

      Economist A researcher who studies the impact of biodiversity on economic systems, with expertise in market analysis
      and the economic benefits of natural resources.


      [AGREE]
      The revised solution has effectively incorporated the suggestions from the ethnobotanist
      and research biologist, addressing community engagement, benefit-sharing, traditional
      knowledge protection, and other crucial aspects of bioprospecting. The emphasis on
      responsible and sustainable bioprospecting ensures that the development of novel
      pharmaceuticals benefits both humans and the environment.
      To further refine the solution, I agree with the research biologist’s suggestion to
      develop a clear and measurable framework for assessing the impact of the Public-
      Private Partnership (PPP) on the pharmaceutical sector, local communities, and the
      environment. Establishing Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and a monitoring and
      evaluation process will help ensure that the PPP is held accountable for its impact
      and remains a responsible and effective approach to bioprospecting.

      Ethnobotanist A scientist who studies the traditional uses of plants by indigenous communities and their potential
      for medicinal applications, with expertise in deciphering the cultural and historical context of natural resources.


      As an ethnobotanist, I agree with the current solution in principle. The Public-Private
      Partnership (PPP) framework has the potential to bring together the necessary
      stakeholders and incentivize the exploration and development of natural products for
      pharmaceuticals while ensuring responsible and sustainable bioprospecting practices.
      The multistep approach outlined is comprehensive and addresses various aspects of
      the issue.




                                                                 xxxiii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                      D. Example Discussions




      Research Biologist               A scientist who studies the properties and potential applications of natural products from a
      wide range of living organisms, with expertise in the discovery and development of new medicines from biodiversity sources.


      I, as a Research Biologist, AGREE with the current solution and the additional
      suggestions proposed by the Ethnobotanist. The Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
      framework is a well-rounded approach that addresses the decline in output from
      the pharmaceutical sector by providing a framework for responsible and sustainable
      bioprospecting, while promoting economic innovation and job creation.
      I particularly appreciate the emphasis on community engagement and empowerment,
      benefit-sharing agreements, traditional knowledge protection, and capacity building for
      ecosystem-based medicine. These considerations will ensure that local communities are
      involved in the decision-making process, receive fair compensation for their involvement,
      and that their traditional knowledge and cultural heritage are respected.


   Result
   Economist final answer: Biodiversity
   Ethnobotanist final answer: Biodiversity provides critical support for drug discovery and
   the availability of economic resources.
   Research Biologist final answer: Biodiversity

   Economist voted for answer from Ethnobotanist
   Ethnobotanist voted for answer from Ethnobotanist
   Research Biologist voted for answer from Ethnobotanist



D.3. Bad Voting Discussion
In this discussion, the agents were tricked by one agent who came up with a solution not provided
in the context.




                                                                xxxiv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions



   Overview
  Task: Answer the following question. If the question is not answerable with the provided
   information, write ’[UNKNOWN]’.
   Input: Where must enclitics appear in an English sentence?
   Context: Because Czech uses grammatical case to convey word function in a sentence
  (instead of relying on word order, as English does), its word order is flexible. As a pro-drop
   language, in Czech an intransitive sentence can consist of only a verb; information about
   its subject is encoded in the verb. Enclitics (primarily auxiliary verbs and pronouns) must
   appear in the second slot of a sentence, after the first stressed unit. The first slot must
   contain a subject and object, a main form of a verb, an adverb or a conjunction (except for
   the light conjunctions a, ”and”, i, ”and even” or ale, ”but”).

      MALLM solution: C) In an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns)
      tend to appear next to the main verb, usually before any other adverbs or modifiers,
      but their placement can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      Real solution: Not included in context!


  Turn 1

      Linguist           A scholar specializing in Slavic languages, experienced in analyzing the grammatical structures of Czech and
      other languages.


      As a linguist, I’d like to analyze the information given about Czech grammar. We
      know that in Czech, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns) must appear in the
      second syntactic slot of a sentence, after the first stressed unit.
      Now, we’re trying to apply this rule to an English sentence. English does not have
      a similar grammatical case system, and its word order is more fixed than Czech.
      However, we can try to find a rough equivalent.
      So, my proposed solution is that in an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and
      pronouns) tend to appear next to the main verb, and usually before any other adverbs
      or modifiers.
      What do you think? Would you like to refine this proposal or add any additional
      considerations?




                                                                   xxxv
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions




      English Language Teacher An expert in teaching English grammar and language structures, familiar with
      the challenges of translating and comparing languages like Czech.


      [DISAGREE]
      While I understand the thought process behind the proposed solution, I think it’s
      essential to consider the unique characteristics of the English language. The idea that
      enclitics in English tend to appear next to the main verb is accurate, but it’s not as
      rigid as the rule in Czech. In Czech, enclitics must appear in the second syntactic slot,
      which implies a more fixed position, whereas in English, the placement of auxiliary
      verbs and pronouns can vary depending on sentence structure and context.

      Grammar Analyst                  A meticulous researcher who has studied the intricacies of languages and their grammatical
      structures, with a focus on comparing and contrasting language features.


      I agree with the English Language Teacher’s revised solution. The initial proposal
      tried to apply the Czech rule to English, but the English language has its unique
      characteristics that require a more nuanced approach. The revised solution accurately
      captures the flexibility of English grammar, acknowledging that the placement of
      enclitics can vary depending on sentence structure and context.


  Turn 2

      Linguist           A scholar specializing in Slavic languages, experienced in analyzing the grammatical structures of Czech and
      other languages.


      I agree with the revised solution proposed by the English Language Teacher and
      the Grammar Analyst. The revised solution accurately captures the flexibility of
      English grammar and acknowledges that the placement of enclitics (auxiliary verbs and
      pronouns) can vary depending on sentence structure and context. * The placement of
      enclitics in English is not as rigid as in Czech, and their placement can vary depending
      on sentence structure and context. * English sentence structure is more complex,
      including indirect objects, passives, and compound verb forms, which can affect the
      placement of auxiliary verbs and pronouns.




                                                                  xxxvi
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                     D. Example Discussions




      English Language Teacher An expert in teaching English grammar and language structures, familiar with
      the challenges of translating and comparing languages like Czech.


      While I understand the thought process behind the proposed solution, I think it’s
      essential to consider the unique characteristics of the English language. The idea that
      enclitics in English tend to appear next to the main verb is accurate, but it’s not as
      rigid as the rule in Czech. In Czech, enclitics must appear in the second syntactic slot,
      which implies a more fixed position, whereas in English, the placement of auxiliary
      verbs and pronouns can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      Additionally, the provided examples, while correct in themselves, don’t fully demon-
      strate the complexity of English sentence structure. For instance, consider sentences
      with indirect objects, passives, or compound verb forms, where the placement of
      auxiliary verbs and pronouns can be more nuanced.

      Grammar Analyst                  A meticulous researcher who has studied the intricacies of languages and their grammatical
      structures, with a focus on comparing and contrasting language features.


      I agree with the English Language Teacher’s revised solution. The initial proposal
      tried to apply the Czech rule to English, but the English language has its unique
      characteristics that require a more nuanced approach. The revised solution accurately
      captures the flexibility of English grammar, acknowledging that the placement of
      enclitics can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      C) In an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns) tend to appear next
      to the main verb, usually before any other adverbs or modifiers, but their placement
      can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      I believe this revised solution provides a more accurate and practical approximation
      of the English language’s enclitic behavior, considering both the unique characteristics
      of English and the complexity of sentence structure.




                                                               xxxvii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                         D. Example Discussions



  Turn 3

      Linguist           A scholar specializing in Slavic languages, experienced in analyzing the grammatical structures of Czech and
      other languages.


      The current solution accurately captures the flexibility of English grammar and
      acknowledges that the placement of enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns) can vary
      depending on sentence structure and context. There’s no need to improve it further.
      The revised solution:
      C) In an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns) tend to appear next
      to the main verb, usually before any other adverbs or modifiers, but their placement
      can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      is a clear and accurate representation of the English language’s enclitic behavior.

      English Language Teacher An expert in teaching English grammar and language structures, familiar with
      the challenges of translating and comparing languages like Czech.


      While I understand the thought process behind the proposed solution, I think it’s
      essential to consider the unique characteristics of the English language. The idea that
      enclitics in English tend to appear next to the main verb is accurate, but it’s not as
      rigid as the rule in Czech. In Czech, enclitics must appear in the second syntactic slot,
      which implies a more fixed position, whereas in English, the placement of auxiliary
      verbs and pronouns can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      Here’s a revised solution: C) In an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and
      pronouns) tend to appear next to the main verb, usually before any other adverbs or
      modifiers, but their placement can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
      What do you think?




                                                                 xxxviii
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                        D. Example Discussions




         Grammar Analyst                  A meticulous researcher who has studied the intricacies of languages and their grammatical
         structures, with a focus on comparing and contrasting language features.


         I agree with the English Language Teacher’s revised solution. The initial proposal
         tried to apply the Czech rule to English, but the English language has its unique
         characteristics that require a more nuanced approach. The revised solution accurately
         captures the flexibility of English grammar, acknowledging that the placement of
         enclitics can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
         The revised solution is an improvement over the initial proposal because it takes
         into account the complexity of English sentence structure, including indirect objects,
         passives, and compound verb forms, which can affect the placement of auxiliary verbs
         and pronouns. Additionally, the revised solution provides a more accurate description
         of the typical placement of enclitics in English sentences, namely next to the main
         verb, usually before any adverbs or modifiers.


   Result
   Linguist final answer: C) In an English sentence, enclitics (auxiliary verbs and pronouns)
   tend to appear next to the main verb, usually before any other adverbs or modifiers, but
   their placement can vary depending on sentence structure and context.
   English Language Teacher final answer: [UNKNOWN]
   Grammar Analyst final answer: [UNKNOWN]

   Linguist voted for answer from Linguist
   English Language Teacher voted for answer from Linguist
   Grammar Analyst voted for answer from Linguist



D.4. Majority Consensus Discussion
In this discussion, the agents discussed only one round, as they already had a high enough agreement
score.




                                                                  xxxix
Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations                                      D. Example Discussions



   Overview
  Task: Answer the following question. If the question is not answerable with the provided
   information, write ’[UNKNOWN]’.
   Input: What choir from the area has sung at the Guildhall?
   Context: Southampton has two large live music venues, the Mayflower Theatre (formerly the
   Gaumont Theatre) and the Guildhall. The Guildhall has seen concerts from a wide range of
   popular artists including Pink Floyd, David Bowie, Delirious?, Manic Street Preachers, The
   Killers, The Kaiser Chiefs, Amy Winehouse, Lostprophets, The Midnight Beast, Modestep,
   and All Time Low. It also hosts classical concerts presented by the Bournemouth Symphony
   Orchestra, City of Southampton Orchestra, Southampton Concert Orchestra, Southampton
   Philharmonic Choir and Southampton Choral Society.

      MALLM solution: Southampton Choral Society
      Real solution: Southampton Philharmonic Choir


  Turn 1

      Music Connoisseur (SOLUTION) A knowledgeable musician who is familiar with various music genres
      and has attended concerts at the Guildhall.


      As a Music Historian, I’ve been through the archives and checked the event schedules
      of the Guildhall. According to my research, one of the choirs that has sung at the
      Guildhall is... Southampton Choral Society!


      Choir Conductor (AGREED)                             A dedicated choral conductor with extensive experience in leading local
      choirs and orchestras, familiar with the performances at the Guildhall.


      [AGREE]
      As a Choir Member of the Southampton Philharmonic Choir who has performed at
      the Guildhall, I can confirm that the Southampton Choral Society is indeed one of
      the choirs that have sung at the Guildhall. Our experiences have shown that we often
      share the stage with the Southampton Choral Society during joint performances with
      orchestras and other ensembles. So, I’m happy to confirm that Southampton Choral
      Society is a correct answer.




                                                                  xl
   Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations          E. AI Usage Card


   E. AI Usage Card
AI Usage Card for Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations



 PROJECT         PROJECT NAME                 DOMAIN                      KEY APPLICATION
 DETAILS         Decision Protocols in        Master Thesis               Natural Language Processing
                 Multi-Agent Large Language
                 Model Conversations
 CONTACT(S)      NAME(S)                      EMAIL(S)                    AFFILIATION(S)
                 Lars Benedikt Kaesberg       l.kaesberg@stud.uni-        Georg-August-University of
                                              goettingen.de               Göttingen

 MODEL(S)        MODEL NAME(S)                VERSION(S)
                 Llama                        3 70b, 3 8b
                 ChatGPT                      4o, o1
                 Github Copilot               latest




 IDEATION        GENERATING IDEAS,            IMPROVING EXISTING IDEAS    FINDING GAPS OR COMPARE
                 OUTLINES, AND                                            ASPECTS OF IDEAS
                 WORKFLOWS


 LITERATURE      FINDING LITERATURE           FINDING EXAMPLES FROM       COMPARING LITERATURE
 REVIEW          ChatGPT                      KNOWN LITERATURE OR
                                              ADDING LITERATURE FOR
                                              EXISTING STATEMENTS
                                              ChatGPT


 METHODOLOGY     PROPOSING NEW SOLUTIONS      FINDING ITERATIVE           COMPARING RELATED
                 TO PROBLEMS                  OPTIMIZATIONS               SOLUTIONS


 EXPERIMENTS     DESIGNING NEW                EDITING EXISTING            FINDING, COMPARING, AND
                 EXPERIMENTS                  EXPERIMENTS                 AGGREGATING RESULTS


 WRITING         GENERATING NEW TEXT          ASSISTING IN IMPROVING      PUTTING OTHER WORKS IN
                 BASED ON INSTRUCTIONS        OWN CONTENT OR              PERSPECTIVE
                 Llama                        PARAPHRASING RELATED
                                              WORK
                                              ChatGPT




                                                 xli
    Decision Protocols in Multi-Agent Large Language Model Conversations         E. AI Usage Card



 PRESENTATION        GENERATING NEW              IMPROVING THE              FINDING RELATIONS
                     ARTIFACTS                   AESTHETICS OF ARTIFACTS    BETWEEN OWN OR RELATED
                                                                            ARTIFACTS


 CODING              GENERATING NEW CODE         REFACTORING AND            COMPARING ASPECTS OF
                     BASED ON DESCRIPTIONS       OPTIMIZING EXISTING CODE   EXISTING CODE
                     OR EXISTING CODE            ChatGPT
                     ChatGPT                     Github Copilot
                     Github Copilot


 DATA                SUGGESTING NEW SOURCES      CLEANING, NORMALIZING,     FINDING RELATIONS
                     FOR DATA COLLECTION         OR STANDARDIZING DATA      BETWEEN DATA AND
                                                                            COLLECTION METHODS


 ETHICS              WHY DID WE USE AI FOR       WHAT STEPS ARE WE          WHAT STEPS ARE WE
                     THIS PROJECT?               TAKING TO MITIGATE         TAKING TO MINIMIZE THE
                     Efficiency / Speed          ERRORS OF AI?              CHANCE OF HARM OR
                     Scalability                 None                       INAPPROPRIATE USE OF AI?
                     Expertise Access                                       None




THE CORRESPONDING AUTHORS VERIFY AND AGREE WITH THE MODIFICATIONS OR GENERATIONS OF THEIR
USED AI-GENERATED CONTENT

AI Usage Card v1.1                           https://ai-cards.org                        PDF — BibTeX




                                                    xlii
