                                             MoodAngels: A Retrieval-augmented Multi-agent
                                                 Framework for Psychiatry Diagnosis


                                                       Mengxi Xiao1,2 , Ben Liu3 , He Li3 , Jimin Huang5 , Qianqian Xie1,2 ,
                                                                      Xiaofen Zong4∗ , Mang Ye3,6∗ , Min Peng1,2∗
                                                                 1
                                                                   School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
                                                        2
                                                           Center for Language and Information Research, Wuhan University
                                                                   3




arXiv:2506.03750v2 [cs.SI] 11 Oct 2025
                                                                     School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
                                                          4
                                                            Department of Psychiatry, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University
                                                                                      5
                                                                                        The Fin AI
                                                         6
                                                            Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University



                                                                                       Abstract
                                                  The application of AI in psychiatric diagnosis faces significant challenges, includ-
                                                  ing the subjective nature of mental health assessments, symptom overlap across
                                                  disorders, and privacy constraints limiting data availability. To address these is-
                                                  sues, we present MoodAngels, the first specialized multi-agent framework for
                                                  mood disorder diagnosis. Our approach combines granular-scale analysis of clin-
                                                  ical assessments with a structured verification process, enabling more accurate
                                                  interpretation of complex psychiatric data. Complementing this framework, we
                                                  introduce MoodSyn, an open-source dataset of 1,173 synthetic psychiatric cases
                                                  that preserves clinical validity while ensuring patient privacy. Experimental results
                                                  demonstrate that MoodAngels outperforms conventional methods, with our base-
                                                  line agent achieving 12.3% higher accuracy than GPT-4o on real-world cases, and
                                                  our full multi-agent system delivering further improvements. Evaluation in the
                                                  MoodSyn dataset demonstrates exceptional fidelity, accurately reproducing both
                                                  the core statistical patterns and complex relationships present in the original data
                                                  while maintaining strong utility for machine learning applications. Together, these
                                                  contributions provide both an advanced diagnostic tool and a critical research re-
                                                  source for computational psychiatry, bridging important gaps in AI-assisted mental
                                                  health assessment.


                                         1   Introduction
                                         Mental diseases [1], with their high prevalence and profound societal impact, pose a major public
                                         health challenge by severely impairing quality of life. Accurate diagnosis [2] is essential for timely
                                         intervention and effective treatment [3], yet the complexity and variability of symptoms make it
                                         particularly difficult [4], highlighting the need for advanced diagnostic tools to aid clinicians. Among
                                         mental diseases, mood disorder, including conditions like depression and bipolar disorder, is critical
                                         due to its high prevalence and the significant overlap of symptoms with other psychiatric conditions [5].
                                         Correctly diagnosing mood disorders is crucial, as it influences the diagnostic process for other
                                         disorders [6]; for example, symptoms like difficulty concentrating may signal neurodevelopmental
                                         disorders only if they occur outside of depressive episodes. Given their prevalence and severe
                                         consequences, including suicide risk and chronic disability, mood disorders represent a significant
                                         burden on individuals and healthcare systems.
                                            ∗
                                              Correspondence to: Min Peng <pengm@whu.edu.cn>, Mang Ye <yemang@whu.edu.cn>, Xiaofen Zong
                                         <zongxiaofen@whu.edu.cn>


                                         39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
                     External Data                                Diagnostic Tools                                  Multi-Angels
                                                                                                                                            reorganization         S
                                                                    Symptom matching            Client              medical record
                                                                                                Data                                        selection          S
                     diagnostic criteria                                S                                           scale performance
                     differential criteria
                                                                    related symptoms with                                                                    ...
                                                                                                                        ...               ...
          DSM-5       Knowledge Base                                corresponding diseases    Individual
           Book                                                                               Diagnosis
                                                                                                           Angel.R             Angel.D             Angel.C
                                                                    similar cases retrieval
                                             reorganization
                                                              S         S    S      S    S                                              The client [has/doesn’t
                     medical records                                                                                   ...
                                                selection                                     Debate and                                have] mood disorder.
                                                              S
                     scale performances                                                         Judge                                   The reasons:
                                                                    similar cases                             ...                       ...
          Clinical
           Data         Data Store                                                                            Debate            Judge



Figure 1: The MoodAngels framework. Diagnostic agents include Angel.R, Angel.D, Angel.C, and
multi-Angels.



While large language models (LLMs) and LLM-based agents demonstrate strong capabilities in
medical domains through robust textual analysis and decision-making, their application to psychiatry
faces unique challenges. General medical diagnostic agents typically rely on concrete medical
records or biological test results [7, 8], resources largely unavailable in psychiatric practice. These
limitations interact with the field’s inherent uncertainties, including significant symptom overlap
across disorders [9–11] and the absence of definitive biomarkers [12, 13] that are standard in other
medical specialties, creating fundamental barriers for AI implementation. These diagnostic difficulties
are intensified by psychiatry’s reliance on nuanced interpretation of subjective clinical data, which
contrasts sharply with the structured evidence typically used to train LLM-based agents [7, 8].
Moreover, the situation faces additional complications from data accessibility constraints. Clinical
diagnostic information, while rich in potential insights, contains sensitive patient data that cannot
be publicly shared, creating a critical bottleneck for AI-driven psychiatric research. Taken together,
this dual challenge of diagnostic complexity and data scarcity underscores the urgent need for
specialized systems capable of emulating clinicians’ probabilistic reasoning under conditions of
imperfect information [14].
To address these challenges, we propose MoodAngels (Figure 1), the first retrieval-augmented
multi-agent framework for mood disorder diagnosis, which enhances the diagnostic process through
granular-scale analysis and multi-step verification. The system tackles the inherent challenges of
psychiatric diagnosis, reliance on potentially unreliable self-reported and clinician-estimated scales
(with optional medical records), by decomposing traditional scale scoring into item-level analysis.
Using Pearson correlation, we identify the top 5% most statistically significant questions for mood
disorders, categorizing them into five diagnostic groups (depression, suicidal ideation, energy/interest
loss, anxiety, and insomnia). By analyzing consistency within these groups, MoodAngels can
resolve diagnostic discrepancies (e.g., when self-reported depressive symptoms conflict with clinical
observations) through additional behavioral marker validation.
To address symptom overlap, we structure DSM-5 diagnostic criteria [15] into a retrievable knowledge
base, augmented with anonymized clinical data to incorporate expert judgment and handle ambiguous
cases. We develop three diagnostic variants to balance historical reliance with individual variability:
Angel.R (no reference), Angel.D (case display), and Angel.C (comparative analysis). Our final multi-
Angels model synthesizes their independent diagnoses through debate, combining computational
efficiency with clinical nuance.
Beyond diagnostic frameworks, clinical data scarcity presents another research challenge. Despite
longstanding interest in depression and bipolar detection, existing methods predominantly analyze
social media posts [16–18], which may be distorted by social norms or exaggeration. To enable
accurate AI-driven psychiatric diagnosis and early detection, we construct the open-source synthetic
dataset MoodSyn2 with 1,173 synthetic psychiatric cases, containing: selected five groups of top-
related scale data, total scores from 13 common mental disorder scales, and mood disorder labels.
Through a comprehensive evaluation of quality, ML efficiency, and privacy protection, we demonstrate
that this synthetic dataset maintains high fidelity while safeguarding visitor confidentiality.

   2
       Code and synthetic data sample are available in MoodAngels.


                                                                              2
We evaluate the effectiveness of our framework on 561 real-world clinical cases and 140 synthetic
cases. Experimental results on both real cases and synthetic data demonstrate the superiority of our
diagnostic process, with all versions of our agents outperforming bare LLMs that rely solely on
client performances as context. Notably, on real data, even our raw agent, Angel.R, achieves a 12.3%
higher diagnostic accuracy than our backbone LLM, GPT-4o. The multi-agent framework further
enhances performance, surpassing the accuracy of all single-agent variants and showing considerable
improvement on hard cases. Ablation studies confirm the individual contributions of our medical
record analysis and scale selection processes, highlighting their critical roles in improving diagnostic
precision.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

             • We propose the first psychiatry diagnosis agent framework, MoodAngels, specifically
               targeting mood disorders. Our agents effectively address challenges such as the lack of
               objective diagnostic tools, symptom overlaps, and clients misjudging or misrepresenting
               their mental states, achieving high diagnostic accuracy.
             • We present MoodSyn, an open-source dataset of 1,173 synthetic psychiatric cases that
               provides clinically plausible alternatives to sensitive patient data while preserving key
               statistical patterns for mood disorder detection research.
             • Experimental results validate the effectiveness of MoodAngels, with all agent variants
               outperforming bare LLMs. Notably, on real-world data, even our raw agent surpasses GPT-
               4o by 12.3% in accuracy, while the multi-agent framework further enhances performance.
               Ablation studies highlight the contributions of the granular-scale analysis and multi-step
               verification, underscoring their importance in achieving robust diagnostics.

2         Retrieval-augmented Multi-agent Framework
In this section, we propose a retrieval-augmented multi-agent framework tailored for the diagnosis
of mood disorders3 , integrating structured clinical knowledge with dynamic decision-making. The
framework consists of three specialized diagnostic agents, each performing an independent diagnostic
process based on reorganized medical records and selected diagnostic scales. These agents employ
two core analytical tools: a Granular-Scale Analysis module that matches symptoms to diagnostic
criteria at a fine-grained level, and a Case-Based Retrieval module that retrieves relevant prior cases
from a curated knowledge base. The diagnostic opinions of the agents are then synthesized through a
structured debate mechanism to form a final judgment.
The key innovations of MoodAngels focus on the depth of symptom analysis and the design of
diversified diagnostic reasoning processes. Unlike conventional methods that rely solely on total scale
scores, the Granular-Scale Analysis method captures intra-scale symptom patterns, which supports a
more personalized and accurate understanding of individual differences. This aspect is particularly
important in psychiatric assessment, where such variability is often overlooked. In addition, although
case retrieval is commonly applied in general medical diagnosis, psychiatric evaluation requires
more cautious application due to its subjectivity and high inter-individual variability. To address
this challenge, the three diagnostic agents are designed with different levels of reliance on historical
cases. This ensures that prior knowledge contributes meaningfully to the diagnostic process without
dominating it. The complementary perspectives of the agents are ultimately integrated through
structured debate, improving both the robustness and interpretability of the final diagnostic outcome.

2.1        Granular-scale Analysis

The primary challenge in constructing the diagnostic framework involves accurately identifying infor-
mation that reliably reflects the visitor’s actual condition. This difficulty arises because psychiatric
diagnoses depend on self-reported data and clinician-estimated scales (supplemented by optional
medical records), which carry inherent risks of misjudgment or misrepresentation.
To address this challenge, we introduce an innovative granular-scale analysis approach4 . Rather
than evaluating scales solely through total scores, we decompose them into individual item-level
      3
          The problem definition is provided in Appendix B.1.
      4
          We provide simple descriptions of scales and the selection process of relevant questions in Appendix B.2.


                                                           3
responses. We employed a comprehensive set of clinical scales to assess various aspects of mental
health, including eight self-reported scales and five clinician-evaluated scales. These tools provide
valuable insights into both subjective experiences and symptoms, as well as clinical observations and
structured evaluations of clients’ mental states and behaviors. All scales are routinely used in hospital
settings for clinical diagnosis, ensuring the reliability and validity of the collected data.
To identify the most relevant questions for mood disorder diagnosis, we computed the Pearson
correlation between each question’s score (and total score) and the presence of a mood disorder,
selecting the top 5% with the highest correlations. These questions naturally clustered into key
symptom groups: depressive mood, loss of interest, anxiety, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies.
These groups enhance diagnostic robustness through cross-validation and comprehensive symptom
coverage. To further refine our framework, we included clinically significant PHQ-9 questions, such
as phq9_Q2 (depressed mood) and phq9_Q1 (loss of interest), even if their correlation scores were
slightly below the threshold, ensuring a nuanced and reliable diagnostic process.
By evaluating response consistency within each symptom group, we derive more accurate inferences
about the visitor’s probable condition. For instance, when a visitor reports frequent depressive
symptoms on a self-assessment scale but clinicians observe no corresponding depressive signs,
this discrepancy directs MoodAngels to investigate additional behavioral markers for diagnostic
validation.

2.2       Retrieval Datastore

Since overlapping symptoms may correspond to multiple disorders, we extract and structure diagnostic
and differential criteria from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 [15],
a widely recognized authority in psychiatry, to build a retrievable knowledge base. The knowledge
base construction process is detailed in Appendix B.3.2.
To prevent MoodAngels from making arbitrary decisions based solely on symptom presentation, we
also incorporate clinicians’ diagnostic expertise by including anonymized clinical data for retrieval.
These experiences are also beneficial when a visitor’s symptoms are ambiguous, for historical
diagnostic precedents may offer additional interpretive insights. The clinical data used in our study
consists of anonymized real-world hospital cases, totaling 2804 entries. We partitioned the dataset
such that 80% of the cases are used as historical cases for retrieval, while the remaining 20% serve
as the test set. All clients in the dataset have completed scale assessments, although clients without
diagnosed conditions do not have medical records available, and our agents are not pre-informed
about this distinction. The dataset statistics are summarized in Table 1.

                         Table 1: Dataset statistics of real-world clinical cases.
                                               Normal   Mood Disorder   Other Diseases   Total
                         cases for retrieval    1259        759              225         2243
                           cases for test       315         190              56           561




2.3       Diagnostic Agents

To mitigate overreliance on past cases (which could overlook individual variability in psychiatric
diagnoses), we develop three diagnostic variants with differing levels of historical dependence:
Angel.R (no reference to previous cases), Angel.D (displays retrieved cases as context), and Angel.C
(compares each retrieved case with the current query and returns an analysis as context). Prompts of
this angels are provided in Appendix C.1. By aggregating independent diagnoses from these three
agents and facilitating debate among their conclusions, our final diagnosis model, multi-Angels,
bridges the gap between computational decision-making and the nuanced understanding essential for
accurate psychiatric evaluations. The following parts introduce the main components of our agents:
Symptom Matching. To align client symptoms in medical records with DSM-5 diagnostic criteria,
we process records and compute relevance between records and criteria using dense vector encoding 5 .
The BGE-M3 embedder [19] is employed for its strong semantic embedding capabilities. We retrieve
      5
    The processing steps of medical records are detailed in Appendix C.2.1, and the formulation of symptom
matching is provided in Appendix C.2.2.


                                                           4
the top-5 most similar criteria, returning their text, classification, and similarity scores. The tool does
not diagnose but provides results for agent analysis, ensuring decisions integrate quantitative data and
clinical expertise, mitigating over-reliance on single metrics.
For cases with overlapping symptoms, an additional instruction prompts the agent to consider
differential diagnosis, guiding systematic evaluation of potential conditions. This enhances the
agent’s ability to distinguish between mood disorders and other diseases.
Scale Performance Analysis. We diagnose the presence of mood disorder using 16 key questions
selected in Section 2.1 as the most mood-relevant items. Client performances are converted from
numeric scores to textual descriptions based on question content and options. For agent interpretability,
performances are reorganized into coherent descriptive paragraphs, enhancing analysis effectiveness
(examples are provided in Appendix C.3).
Similar Cases Retrieval. To leverage clinical experience from similar cases, we develop two optional
tools for retrieving medical records and scales with similar performance. After performing similarity
retrieval, our tools generate different outputs tailored to the type of diagnosis agent in use. For
Angel.R, this tool is intentionally excluded to minimize potential interference from the diagnostic
outcomes of other cases. For Angel.D, the tool directly returns the retrieved cases for reference,
enabling the agent to review and draw insights from them. For Angel.C, the tool conducts a detailed
comparison of similarities and differences among the retrieved cases and returns an analysis text
summarizing the findings. Consistent with the symptom matching tool, we employ BGE-M3 as the
retriever. This approach ensures that the tool adapts to the specific needs of each diagnosis agent,
enhancing the diagnostic process while maintaining flexibility and precision.
Multi-agent Diagnosis. To integrate insights from all Angels and improve diagnostics, Angel.R,
Angel.D, and Angel.C first provide independent decisions and reasoning. A Judge Agent consolidates
their inputs. If consensus is reached, the Judge outputs the diagnosis and reasoning. For disagreements,
two Debate Agents are introduced: a Positive Agent, supporting a mood disorder diagnosis, and a
Negative Agent, opposing it. Both Debate Agents and the Judge access symptom matching results,
scale performances, relevant cases, and the Angels’ diagnosis and reasoning. In each debate round,
the Positive Agent speaks first, followed by the Negative Agent. After each round, the Judge evaluates
the arguments and decides whether to conclude the debate. If concluded, the Judge delivers the final
diagnosis and supporting reasons. More details about the judge and a complete debate example are
presented in Appendix C.4.1.


3   MoodSyn Dataset

The MoodSyn dataset addresses the critical need for clinically valid yet privacy-preserving data in
computational psychiatry by introducing an open-source collection of 1,173 synthetic cases, as the
statistics shown in Table 2. Each case captures the essential characteristics of psychiatric assessments
through 25 carefully selected features, including 16 diagnostic questions, 8 standard scale scores, and
expert-verified mood disorder labels. A data example is shown in Appendix D.1.


Table 2: Descriptive statistics of the synthetic MoodSyn dataset. Positive counts represent cases with
mood disorder diagnoses, while negative counts indicate an absence of mood disorders.
                                                 positive amount   negative amount   Total
                            cases for retieval        687               419          1106
                              cases for test           73                67           140



Dataset Construction. The MoodSyn dataset is constructed on an advanced synthesis pipeline
built upon the TabSyn framework [20], which integrates variational autoencoders with diffusion
models through several technical innovations. The architecture employs adaptive tokenization and
hierarchical encoding to maintain the complex relationships between clinical features, while a condi-
tional denoising process preserves the nuanced symptom patterns characteristic of mood disorders.
During generation, dynamic loss weighting ensures the mathematical consistency between individual
question responses and their corresponding scale scores, and context-aware sampling maintains
clinically meaningful feature correlations. The construction process is detailed in Appendix D.1.


                                                            5
Dataset Evaluation. Following Zhang et al. [20], we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
MoodSyn across five critical dimensions: statistical density, data quality, machine learning efficacy,
privacy preservation, and logistic detectability (detailed in Appendix D.2). The results demonstrate
exceptional fidelity to real clinical data, with MoodSyn accurately reproducing both core statistical
patterns and complex symptom relationships while maintaining strong utility for machine learning
applications. Specifically, our evaluation reveals high-density preservation of univariate and multi-
variate distributions matching the original data’s feature patterns, robust performance in downstream
diagnostic prediction tasks comparable to real data, and near-indistinguishability in rigorous detection
tests. Furthermore, MoodSyn provides stronger privacy guarantees than traditional anonymization
approaches through its synthetic generation process. This unique combination of statistical fidelity,
clinical validity, and privacy protection establishes MoodSyn as both a reliable analytical surrogate
and a valuable resource for advancing AI applications in mental health research.

4     Experiment
4.1   Experimental Settings

Datasets. We assess the effectiveness of our agent framework on the test set described in Table
1, which comprises 561 cases. These include 315 normal cases, 56 cases of mood disorders, and
190 cases of other mental disorders. Cases without mental disorders contain only scale data and no
medical records, whereas the remaining cases include both medical records and scale data. All cases
are derived from real clinical data collected from our corporate hospital, ensuring the evaluation
reflects practical diagnostic scenarios.
Baselines. To evaluate the effectiveness of our agent, we compare it against five baseline
LLMs: LLaMA3-8B-Instruct [21], Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 [22], GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06) [23],
DeepSeek-V3 [24], and medgemma-27b-text-it [25]. Each LLM is provided with a standardized
input consisting of: (1) A combined medical record, presented as a unified narrative. (2) A summary
of scale test results, listing the client’s scores across multiple psychological scales along with their
clinical implications. The LLMs are prompted to determine whether the client has a mood disorder
(including depression or bipolar disorder) and to provide a structured explanation in JSON format.
An example of the prompt used for baseline models is shown in Figure 8.
Hyperparameters. The retrieval number k for Angel.D and Angel.C is set to k = 5 by default. For
each model, we employ default parameter settings, utilizing official models for open-source LLMs
obtained from Hugging Face or the API from the official website. These testing procedures take place
on a computational infrastructure consisting of two NVIDIA A800 Tensor Core GPUs, equipped
with 80GB of memory.
Evaluation Metrics. Following previous methods [16], we utilize Recall, Accuracy (ACC), Matthews
Correlation Coefficient (MCC) [26], and Macro F1 to evaluate the performance of various versions
of MoodAngels and baseline LLMs on the mood disorder diagnosis.
More details about baseline prompts and the selection of retrieval number k are provided in Ap-
pendix E.1.

4.2   Analysis of Experimental Results

Our diagnostic framework achieves superior performance through innovative components that trans-
form psychiatric assessment. Unlike conventional approaches limited by total score interpretation
of standardized scales, MoodAngels implements granular item-level analysis that identifies and
groups mood-relevant questions, overcoming the inherent information loss of aggregate scoring. This
technical advancement enables more precise detection of symptom patterns that would otherwise be
obscured in traditional scale processing. The framework’s structured diagnostic process represents
another significant innovation, replacing the direct diagnosis generation used by baseline models with
a rigorous multi-step verification system. While Angel.R establishes core functionality through DSM-
5 criteria referencing, our more advanced variants incorporate clinical case retrieval and inter-agent
debate, a substantial departure from the direct inference approach employed by bare LLMs.
The experimental results presented in Tables 3 and 4 demonstrate the clear advantages of this
approach. We further observed that the generated reasoning demonstrates high quality, as detailed


                                                   6
in Appendix E.2.1. All MoodAngels variants show substantial improvements over baseline LLMs,
with even our foundational agent achieving 12.3% greater accuracy than GPT-4o, underscoring the
effectiveness of our redesigned diagnostic process. A deeper examination of the agent comparisons
reveals important insights about psychiatric diagnosis. The performance advantage of Angel.D
over Angel.R confirms the clinical value of historical cases as reference points, while the slight dip
observed with Angel.C serves as a caution against over-reliance on past cases. Particularly telling
are those instances where only one agent succeeds in making the correct diagnosis while others fail,
highlighting both the complexity of psychiatric assessment and the complementary nature of different
diagnostic approaches.
We also conduct subgroup analysis on gender and age, confirming no significant bias in predictions
(detailed in Appendix E.2.2). These findings collectively validate our multi-agent framework’s
design, which synthesizes granular symptom analysis, structured diagnostic protocols, and balanced
clinical experience integration through its collaborative debate mechanism. The framework’s ultimate
performance superiority emerges from this sophisticated combination of innovations, each addressing
specific limitations in conventional psychiatric assessment methods while working in concert to
achieve more accurate and reliable diagnoses.


                   Table 3: Diagnosis performances of all methods on real data.
                                  Model                    Recall     ACC    MCC     Macro F1
                                                     in-context learning
                           LLaMA3-8B-Instruct              0.393     0.506   0.315    0.492
                          Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3         0.456     0.597   0.411    0.397
                                  GPT-4o                   0.631     0.797   0.639    0.792
                               Deepseek-V3                 0.703     0.847   0.716    0.841
                                medgemma                    0.67     0.743    0.57    0.717
                                                 GPT-4o based agents
                           Angel.RGP T −4o                 0.840     0.920   0.829    0.913
                           Angel.DGP T −4o                 0.845     0.923   0.837    0.917
                           Angel.CGP T −4o                 0.848     0.914   0.814    0.906
                          multi-AngelsGP T −4o             0.881     0.925   0.834    0.917
                                              Deepseek-V3 based agents
                         Angel.RDeepseek−V 3               0.863     0.927   0.841    0.920
                         Angel.DDeepseek−V 3               0.864     0.920   0.823    0.911
                         Angel.CDeepseek−V 3               0.858     0.922   0.829    0.914
                        multi-AngelsDeepseek−V 3           0.866     0.923   0.832    0.916




                 Table 4: Diagnosis performances of all methods on synthetic data.
                                  Method                   Recall     ACC    MCC     Macro F1
                                                     in-context learning
                           LLaMA3-8B-Instruct              0.557     0.564   0.221    0.435
                          Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3         0.589     0.636   0.375    0.563
                               Deepseek-V3                 0.761     0.821   0.664    0.816
                                medgemma                   0.535     0.704   0.525    0.704
                                              Deepseek-V3 based agents
                         Angel.RDeepseek−V 3               0.778      0.8    0.601    0.798
                         Angel.DDeepseek−V 3               0.787     0.807   0.615    0.805
                         Angel.CDeepseek−V 3               0.816     0.821   0.642    0.821
                        multi-AngelsDeepseek−V 3           0.824     0.821   0.642    0.821




4.3   Ablation Study

In this section, we adapt Angel.R on real data to test the efficiency of processed medical records
and selected scales. Additionally, we evaluate the stability of our framework by changing parameter
settings in Appendix E.3.


                                                             7
4.3.1    Medical Record Format
In this section, we investigated whether structured medical records improve the performance of
the agents. Initially, we tested different formats in the symptom matching process, which extracts
diagnostic criteria from the DSM-5 based on a medical record. Comparing Setting 1 and Setting 2,
we observed only a slight decline in the agents’ performance. Upon further analysis of the diagnostic
criteria retrieved for a specific case, we found that the extracted criteria were highly relevant and
similar. In most instances, the diagnostic criteria extracted under both experimental settings were
identical, demonstrating the robustness and inclusivity of our chosen retriever.
However, when medical records were presented to the agent in different formats, the agent’s diagnostic
performance showed significant variation. Comparing Setting 2 and Setting 3, where the same record
format was used in the symptom matching step but different formats were returned to the agent, we
identified cases where the diagnosis was correct in Setting 2 but incorrect in Setting 3. We found that
a continuous, narrative-style medical record contains more detailed descriptions, which better reflect
the severity of the client’s condition. In contrast, structured medical records tend to focus on objective
facts, potentially overlooking nuanced symptoms. This makes it more challenging to identify patients
with atypical presentations of mood disorders. For example, a patient with severe depression may
not exhibit obvious signs of low mood or mania but instead feel a sense of hopeless calmness and
express suicidal ideation. This "hopeless calmness" is clearly conveyed in a narrative-style medical
record but may be less apparent in a structured format.
In summary, while structured medical records offer consistency and objectivity, they may lack the
nuanced details present in narrative-style records, which are crucial for identifying atypical or subtle
symptoms of mood disorders. This highlights the importance of balancing structured data with rich,
descriptive narratives to ensure accurate and comprehensive psychiatric diagnosis.

Table 5: Diagnosis accuracy of different medical record formats in symptom matching and agent
processing steps. The numbers indicate different combinations of experimental settings for ease of
reference. In the experimental analysis, these settings are directly referred to as Setting 1, Setting 2
and Setting 3.
                         Symptom Matching    Return to Agent         ACC               MCC
                     1     unstructured           unstructured      0.920        \     0.829      \
                     2      structured            unstructured      0.918     0.002↓   0.822   0.007↓
                     3      structured             structured       0.914     0.006↓   0.814   0.015↓



4.3.2    Selection of Scales
In this section, we compared the diagnostic accuracy of Angel.R when using two different input
strategies: providing 16 selected questions most relevant to mood disorders from the 13 scales,
and providing the total scores of all 13 scales without any filtering. The results in Table 6 reveal a
significant performance drop of 6.8% in accuracy when using the unfiltered total scores, highlighting
the importance of question selection. This substantial decline underscores that the inclusion of less
relevant or noisy data from unrelated questions can adversely impact the agent’s diagnostic precision.
By focusing on the most pertinent questions, our agent achieves more reliable and accurate mood
disorder assessments.

Table 6: Diagnosis accuracy of selected and unselected scales used in the agent processing steps.
The numbers indicate different combinations of experimental settings for ease of reference. In the
experimental analysis, these settings are directly referred to as Setting 1 and Setting 4.
                                     Scale Used       ACC                   MCC
                                1     selected       0.920          \       0.829      \
                                4    unselected      0.852       0.068↓     0.708   0.121↓




4.4     Case Study

To demonstrate the robustness and diagnostic capabilities of our agents, we present two critical
scenarios: inter-scale conflicts and overlapping symptoms. In inter-scale conflict cases, clients


                                                             8
may misjudge their condition in self-reported scales or, due to certain personality traits or stress
responses, may not fully disclose their true feelings to clinicians. In such situations, our approach
of grouping and analyzing similar questions across different scales proves invaluable, enabling the
agent to identify inconsistencies and arrive at a more accurate diagnosis. Additionally, we examine
cases with overlapping symptoms, where a single symptom may be indicative of multiple diseases,
significantly complicating the diagnostic process. In these instances, simple symptom matching alone
may fail to pinpoint the accurate disease. However, by leveraging historical case experiences and
employing a multi-agent debate framework to explore various possibilities, MoodAngels achieves a
more nuanced and precise diagnosis, bringing it closer to the underlying truth. These case studies
highlight the strengths of our method in handling complex real-world diagnostic challenges. The
intuitive presentations of these cases are shown in Appendix E.4.
Inter-Scale Conflicts. We analyze a case where self-reported scales conflict with clinician-evaluated
performances. Although the client scored 11 on the PHQ-9, suggesting moderate depression, self-
reports are subjective. Clinician evaluations across multiple professional scales (e.g., HAMD, HAMA,
BPRS) revealed no depressive symptoms or energy decline, providing more objective diagnostic
assurance. Historical cases with similar self-reported depression but no clinician-confirmed symptoms
further support this conclusion. While the client reported mild to moderate anxiety, which correlates
with mood disorders, it was insufficient for a diagnosis, especially given the clinician’s negative
findings. The absence of clinician-confirmed symptoms led our agent to conclude no mood disorder,
demonstrating its ability to resolve inter-scale conflicts through comprehensive analysis of grouped
questions and historical data.
Overlapping Symptoms. We analyze a particularly challenging diagnostic scenario with overlapping
symptoms. While the client’s self-reports indicated negative emotions, suicidal tendencies, and loss
of interest, the clinician found none of these. However, the medical record confirmed the self-reports,
also noting delusions and self-talk. Symptom matching with DSM-5 criteria further complicated
the diagnosis, as the top five matched disorders spanned Mood Disorder, Personality Disorder, and
Neurocognitive Disorder, none of which included the actual diagnosis of Schizophrenia. Only
through historical case retrieval and multi-agent debate did the Judge Agent identify that the client
had concealed symptoms during clinical interviews, ultimately leading to the correct Schizophrenia
diagnosis. This case highlights the difficulty of diagnosing complex cases with overlapping symptoms
and underscores our agent’s strength in integrating diverse data sources to uncover hidden diagnostic
patterns.




4.5   Error Analysis


We examined cases where the three single angels disagreed and instances where the multi-agent
debate still resulted in incorrect diagnoses. These cases typically involved borderline symptoms or
conflicts between medical records and scale performances. Conflicts between medical records and
scale performances are particularly challenging, as they often require additional information to make
a more confident diagnosis.
Borderline Cases. Some clients’ self-reported and clinician-evaluated scale performances were
highly consistent, both indicating mild degrees of depression, anxiety, insomnia, and loss of interest.
After discussion with our coauthor expert, we concluded that while the client does not currently meet
the diagnostic threshold for major depressive disorder, they fall on the borderline between normal
and mild depression. Such cases warrant close attention and monitoring.
Conflicts between Medical Record and Scale Performances. In some cases, the medical record
indicates severe symptoms, while both self-reported and clinician-evaluated scales show minimal or
no symptoms related to mood disorders, with most relevant questions scoring zero. This discrepancy
may arise when the client is in remission from a severe mood disorder, when medication temporarily
suppresses negative emotions, or when the client has recovered. Recognizing this challenge, we
enhanced our agents to flag such cases for clinicians, prompting further investigation. While the
agents may misjudge the presence of a mood disorder in these scenarios, this additional signal ensures
that critical cases are not overlooked, thereby improving diagnostic reliability and clinical utility.


                                                  9
5   Conclusion
In conclusion, we propose MoodAngels, the first specialized multi-agent framework for mood
disorder diagnosis that addresses key challenges in psychiatry through granular-scale analysis and
structured multi-step verification, achieving superior accuracy over existing methods. Our framework
is complemented by MoodSyn, an open-source synthetic dataset of 1,173 clinically validated cases
that enables research while preserving privacy. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach, with the baseline agent outperforming GPT-4o by 12.3% and the full multi-agent
system achieving even greater accuracy. These contributions advance AI applications in mental health
by providing both an effective diagnostic framework and a valuable research resource that addresses
critical gaps in computational psychiatry.

Ethical Statement
All medical record de-identification was conducted in an offline environment, ensuring no data was
processed on external or networked systems. To further protect privacy, the medical records presented
in this paper have undergone event and symptom obfuscation, along with partial modification.
Additionally, all cases used in this study were included with the explicit consent of the clients, strictly
for academic research purposes.
Evaluators’ Background. Our evaluation team consists of coauthors who are experts in the field, led
by a professional attending physician and professor with over 20 years of clinical experience. This lead
evaluator is affiliated with one of the most authoritative hospitals in our country, bringing unparalleled
expertise and credibility to the evaluation process. Their deep understanding of psychiatric disorders
and extensive clinical background ensured a rigorous and reliable assessment of the knowledge base.

Limitations
Our study is limited by the available data, which only includes client medical records and scale scores,
restricting our ability to fully replicate the comprehensive diagnostic process employed by clinicians.
Clinician diagnoses typically involve around one hour of patient interviews, during which additional
clinician-evaluated scales are completed and more granular judgments are made based on real-time
interactions. While our approach cannot fully capture this in-depth process, it still provides valuable
insights by leveraging existing data to support mood disorder diagnosis, offering a promising tool for
assisting clinicians in cases where complete diagnostic information may not be available.

Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by Key Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(U23A20316), National Key Research and Development Program of China (2024YFC3308400),
and CCF-Tencent Rhino-Bird Open Research Fund (CCF-Tencent RAGR20250115). We grate-
fully acknowledge all clinicians who participated in the controlled reader study for their valuable
contributions to model evaluation.

References
 [1] Dominic Murphy and Robert L Woolfolk. The harmful dysfunction analysis of mental disorder.
     Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 7(4):241–252, 2000.
 [2] Steven E Hyman. The diagnosis of mental disorders: the problem of reification. Annual review
     of clinical psychology, 6(1):155–179, 2010.
 [3] Robert J Haggerty and Patricia J Mrazek. Reducing risks for mental disorders: Frontiers for
     preventive intervention research. National Academies Press, 1994.
 [4] Carolyn E Schwartz, Robert M Kaplan, John P Anderson, Troy Holbrook, and M Wilson
     Genderson. Covariation of physical and mental symptoms across illnesses: Results of a factor
     analytic study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 21(2):122–127, 1999.


                                                   10
 [5] Jeffrey Rakofsky and Mark Rapaport. Mood disorders. CONTINUUM: Lifelong Learning in
     Neurology, 24(3):804–827, 2018.
 [6] Eiko I Fried, Claudia D van Borkulo, Angélique OJ Cramer, Lynn Boschloo, Robert A Schoevers,
     and Denny Borsboom. Mental disorders as networks of problems: a review of recent insights.
     Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 52:1–10, 2017.
 [7] Junkai Li, Yunghwei Lai, Weitao Li, Jingyi Ren, Meng Zhang, Xinhui Kang, Siyu Wang, Peng
     Li, Ya-Qin Zhang, Weizhi Ma, et al. Agent hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable
     medical agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02957, 2024.
 [8] Haochun Wang, Sendong Zhao, Zewen Qiang, Nuwa Xi, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. Beyond
     direct diagnosis: Llm-based multi-specialist agent consultation for automatic diagnosis. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.16107, 2024.
 [9] Omid Kohandel Gargari, Farhad Fatehi, Ida Mohammadi, Shahryar Rajai Firouzabadi, Arman
     Shafiee, and Gholamreza Habibi. Diagnostic accuracy of large language models in psychiatry.
     Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 100:104168, 2024.
[10] Daniel F Gros, Matthew Price, Kathryn M Magruder, and B Christopher Frueh. Symptom
     overlap in posttraumatic stress disorder and major depression. Psychiatry research, 196(2-3):
     267–270, 2012.
[11] Miriam K Forbes. Implications of the symptom-level overlap among dsm diagnoses for
     dimensions of psychopathology. Journal of Emotion and Psychopathology, 1(1):104–112, 2023.
[12] John A Bilello. Seeking an objective diagnosis of depression. Biomarkers in medicine, 10(8):
     861–875, 2016.
[13] Shitij Kapur, Anthony G Phillips, and Thomas R Insel. Why has it taken so long for biological
     psychiatry to develop clinical tests and what to do about it? Molecular psychiatry, 17(12):
     1174–1179, 2012.
[14] Yu He Ke, Rui Yang, Sui An Lie, Taylor Xin Yi Lim, Hairil Rizal Abdullah, Daniel Shu Wei
     Ting, and Nan Liu. Enhancing diagnostic accuracy through multi-agent conversations: Using
     large language models to mitigate cognitive bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14589, 2024.
[15] DSMTF American Psychiatric Association, DS American Psychiatric Association, et al. Di-
     agnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5, volume 5. American psychiatric
     association Washington, DC, 2013.
[16] Nawshad Farruque, Randy Goebel, Sudhakar Sivapalan, and Osmar R Zaïane. Depression
     symptoms modelling from social media text: an llm driven semi-supervised learning approach.
     Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 1–29, 2024.
[17] Yuxi Wang, Diana Inkpen, and Prasadith Kirinde Gamaarachchige. Explainable depression
     detection using large language models on social media data. In Proceedings of the 9th Workshop
     on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology (CLPsych 2024), pages 108–126, 2024.
[18] Daeun Lee, Hyolim Jeon, Sejung Son, Chaewon Park, Ji hyun An, Seungbae Kim, and Jinyoung
     Han. Detecting bipolar disorder from misdiagnosed major depressive disorder with mood-aware
     multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1:
     Long Papers), pages 4954–4970, 2024.
[19] Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-
     embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through
     self-knowledge distillation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03216.
[20] Hengrui Zhang, Jiani Zhang, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Zhengyuan Shen, Xiao Qin, Christos
     Faloutsos, Huzefa Rangwala, and George Karypis. Mixed-type tabular data synthesis with
     score-based diffusion in latent space. In The twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2024.


                                                11
[21] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
[22] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
     Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
     Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut
     Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
[23] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
     Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4
     technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[24] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
     Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
[25] Andrew Sellergren, Sahar Kazemzadeh, Tiam Jaroensri, Atilla Kiraly, Madeleine Traverse,
     Timo Kohlberger, Shawn Xu, Fayaz Jamil, Cían Hughes, Charles Lau, et al. Medgemma
     technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05201, 2025.
[26] Brian W Matthews. Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of t4 phage
     lysozyme. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Protein Structure, 405(2):442–451, 1975.
[27] Kailai Yang, Shaoxiong Ji, Tianlin Zhang, Qianqian Xie, Ziyan Kuang, and Sophia Ananiadou.
     Towards interpretable mental health analysis with large language models. In Proceedings of the
     2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6056–6077,
     2023.
[28] Kailai Yang, Tianlin Zhang, Ziyan Kuang, Qianqian Xie, Jimin Huang, and Sophia Ananiadou.
     Mentallama: interpretable mental health analysis on social media with large language models.
     In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, pages 4489–4500, 2024.
[29] Zhuang Chen, Jiawen Deng, Jinfeng Zhou, Jincenzi Wu, Tieyun Qian, and Minlie Huang.
     Depression detection in clinical interviews with llm-empowered structural element graph. In
     Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
     Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
     8174–8187, 2024.
[30] Ana-Maria Bucur. Leveraging llm-generated data for detecting depression symptoms on social
     media. In International Conference of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum for European
     Languages, pages 193–204. Springer, 2024.
[31] Benyou Wang, Qianqian Xie, Jiahuan Pei, Zhihong Chen, Prayag Tiwari, Zhao Li, and Jie Fu.
     Pre-trained language models in biomedical domain: A systematic survey. ACM Computing
     Surveys, 56(3):1–52, 2023.
[32] Qianqian Xie, Qingyu Chen, Aokun Chen, Cheng Peng, Yan Hu, Fongci Lin, Xueqing Peng,
     Jimin Huang, Jeffrey Zhang, Vipina Keloth, et al. Medical foundation large language models
     for comprehensive text analysis and beyond. npj Digital Medicine, 8(1):141, 2025.




                                                12
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
    1. Claims
       Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
       paper’s contributions and scope?
       Answer: [Yes]
       Justification: The abstract and the last paragraph of the introduction summarize our contri-
       butions.
       Guidelines:
          • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
             made in the paper.
          • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
             contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
             NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
          • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
             much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
          • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
             are not attained by the paper.
    2. Limitations
       Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
       Answer: [Yes]
       Justification: In the limitation section.
       Guidelines:
          • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
             the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
          • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
          • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
             violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
             model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
             should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
             implications would be.
          • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
             only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
             depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
          • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
             For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
             is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
             used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
             technical jargon.
          • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
             and how they scale with dataset size.
          • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
             address problems of privacy and fairness.
          • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
             reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
             limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
             judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
             tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
             will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
    3. Theory assumptions and proofs
       Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
       a complete (and correct) proof?
       Answer: [NA]


                                                  13
   Justification: This paper is an application study without new theoretical assumptions pro-
   posed.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
      • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
         referenced.
      • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
      • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
         they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
         proof sketch to provide intuition.
      • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
         by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
      • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
   Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
   perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
   of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We provide all code and synthetic data in supplemental materials.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
         well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
         whether the code and data are provided or not.
      • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
         to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
      • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
         For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
         might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
         be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
         dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
         one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
         instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
         of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
         appropriate to the research performed.
      • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
         sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
         nature of the contribution. For example
        (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
             to reproduce that algorithm.
        (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
             the architecture clearly and fully.
        (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
             either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
             the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
             the dataset).
        (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
             authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
             In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
             some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
             to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
   Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
   tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
   material?


                                             14
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We provide all code and synthetic data in the supplemental meterial.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
      • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
         public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
      • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
         possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
         including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
         benchmark).
      • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
         reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
        //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
      • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
         to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
      • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
         proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
         should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
      • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
         versions (if applicable).
      • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
         paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
   Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
   parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
   results?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We mentioned them in experimental settings.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
         that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
      • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
         material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
   Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
   information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: In error analysis section.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
         dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
         the main claims of the paper.
      • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
         example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
         run with given experimental conditions).
      • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
         call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
      • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
      • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
         of the mean.


                                              15
       • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
          preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
          of Normality of errors is not verified.
       • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
          figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
          error rates).
       • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
          they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
 8. Experiments compute resources
    Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
    puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
    the experiments?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: In experimental settings.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
          or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
       • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
          experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
       • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
          than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
          didn’t make it into the paper).
 9. Code of ethics
    Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
    NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: In ethical statement section.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
       • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
          deviation from the Code of Ethics.
       • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
          eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader impacts
    Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
    societal impacts of the work performed?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: In contribution paragraph of introduction.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
       • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
          impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
       • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
          (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
          (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
          groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
       • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
          to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
          any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
          to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to


                                              16
          generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
          that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
          models that generate Deepfakes faster.
       • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
          being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
          technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
          from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
       • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
          strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
          mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
          feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
    Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
    release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
    image generators, or scraped datasets)?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: We provide a usage declaration in supplemental materials.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
       • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
          necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
          that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
          safety filters.
       • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
          should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
       • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
          not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
          faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
    Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
    the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
    properly respected?
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: We don’t use any existing dataset in the paper.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
       • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
       • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
          URL.
       • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
       • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
          service of that source should be provided.
       • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
          package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
          has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
          license of a dataset.
       • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
          the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
       • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
          the asset’s creators.
13. New assets
    Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
    provided alongside the assets?


                                             17
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We provide it in supplemental materials.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
      • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
        submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
        limitations, etc.
      • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
        asset is used.
      • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
        create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
   Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
   include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
   well as details about compensation (if any)?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: In supplemental materials.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
        human subjects.
      • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
        tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
        included in the main paper.
      • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
        or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
        collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
    subjects
   Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
   such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
   approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
   institution) were obtained?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We upload the IRB approvals in supplemental materials.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
        human subjects.
      • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
        may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
        should clearly state this in the paper.
      • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
        and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
        guidelines for their institution.
      • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
        applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
   Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
   non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
   only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology,
   scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
   Answer: [Yes]


                                            18
Justification: The LLMs are served as our backbone model.
Guidelines:
   • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
      involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
   • Please refer to our LLM policy (https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
      for what should or should not be described.




                                    19
A     Related Work

A.1   LLM-based Depression and Bipolar-disorder Detection

Recent advancements in depression detection [27, 28] have primarily focused on leveraging large
language models (LLMs) to address the challenges of psychiatric diagnosis. Chen et al. [29] proposed
structuring clinical interviews into a directed acyclic graph to enable automatic diagnosis, though
this approach may struggle with cases where clients misrepresent their conditions. Social media
platforms have also become a valuable resource for depression detection due to the abundance of user-
generated content. Farruque et al. [16] fine-tuned a pre-trained language model on specific datasets to
detect depressive symptoms from self-disclosed tweets, while Wang et al. [17] employed LLMs to
identify depression-related text and predict depression levels from Reddit posts. Additionally, Lee
et al. [18] utilized historical mood swings from users’ past social media activities to detect bipolar
disorder. Efforts to enhance data quality and model performance have further explored synthetic
data generation; for instance, Bucur [30] used LLMs to generate synthetic data for BDI-II symptoms,
enriching datasets with semantic diversity and emotional experiences unique to Reddit posts. These
approaches collectively highlight the potential of LLMs and social media data in advancing depression
detection, though challenges remain in ensuring accuracy and addressing client misrepresentations.

A.2   Medical Diagnosis Agents

Recent studies have begun to explore the potential of LLMs [31, 32] in medical diagnosis, though
these approaches often face limitations when applied to psychiatric contexts. Li et al. [7] proposed a
general disease diagnosis framework that leverages medical examination reports, such as blood tests
and cell staining, to retrieve similar cases and rules. A doctor agent then evaluates the information
to make a diagnosis, and correctly diagnosed cases are added to a historical database for future
retrieval. However, this method is unsuitable for psychiatric diagnosis due to its lack of patient data
anonymization, which could lead to privacy concerns and patient resistance. Additionally, psychiatric
diagnosis lacks objective diagnostic tools and often involves overlapping symptoms, making rule-
based approaches ineffective. Similarly, Wang et al. [8] enhanced agent expertise using external
knowledge from the National Institutes of Health for conditions like diarrhea and bronchitis. Their
agent-specialist outputs a probability distribution over possible diagnoses based on patient-reported
symptoms. However, this approach struggles with psychiatric cases where clients may misrepresent
or inaccurately estimate their mental state, highlighting the need for more nuanced frameworks
tailored to mental health diagnoses.


B     Details of MoodAngels Framework

B.1   Problem Definition

Mood disorder diagnosis is a binary classification task aimed at determining whether a client has a
mood disorder, such as depression or bipolar disorder, based on a given case of clinical data. The
input for each case includes structured clinical information, which consists of medical records (which
may be absent for first-time visitors) and scale performance data (which is always available). The
output of the task is a diagnostic result, represented as a binary decision (yes or no), along with
supporting reasons that justify the diagnosis. Formally, for a given case C = (M, S), where M
represents the medical records and S represents the scale performance data, the goal is to determine
f (C) = (ŷ, r). Here, ŷ ∈ {0, 1} is the predicted diagnosis (1 indicating the presence of a mood
disorder and 0 indicating its absence), and r is the reasoning that supports the prediction. This task is
particularly challenging due to the potential absence of medical records for some cases and the need
to provide interpretable reasoning for the diagnostic decision.
Currently, our framework performs binary classification to determine whether a mood disorder is
present. While we have extracted the DSM-5 differential criteria for more fine-grained distinctions,
we do not attempt subcategory classification. This is because psychiatric diagnosis requires careful
deliberation; in clinical practice, clinicians typically first identify a broad diagnostic direction before
narrowing it down through further assessments. Similarly, our framework is designed to support this
initial diagnostic stage.


                                                    20
B.2     Granular-scale Analysis

B.2.1    Scale Descriptions
Self-evaluated scales:
(1) CTQ (Childhood Trauma Questionnaire). A retrospective self-report inventory that measures
the severity of childhood trauma across five domains: emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, as well
as emotional and physical neglect. The scale content is available at CTQ.
(2) DAS (Dysfunctional Attitude Scale). A self-report measure that assesses maladaptive cognitive
patterns and beliefs associated with depression. The scale content is available at DAS.
(3) GAD-7 (Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7). A self-report scale used to assess the severity of
generalized anxiety disorder symptoms over the past two weeks. The scale content is available at
GAD-7.
(4) HCL-32 (Hypomania Checklist-32). A self-report questionnaire designed to identify symptoms
of hypomania, often used in the assessment of bipolar disorder. The scale content is available at
HCL-32.
(5) MDQ (Mood Disorder Questionnaire). A self-report screening tool used to identify symptoms
of bipolar spectrum disorders. The scale content is available at MDQ.
(6) NSSI (Non-Suicidal Self-Injury Assessment). A self-report measure designed to assess the
frequency, methods, and motivations behind non-suicidal self-injurious behaviors. The scale content
is available at NSSI.
(7) PHQ-9 (Patient Health Questionnaire-9). A self-administered tool used to screen for and
measure the severity of depression based on the DSM-5 criteria. The scale content is available at
PHQ-9.
(8) SHAPS (Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale). A self-report measure designed to assess anhedonia,
or the inability to experience pleasure, commonly associated with depression. The scale content is
available at SHAPS.
Clinician-rated scales:
(9) BPRS (Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale). A clinician-administered scale that evaluates a broad
range of psychiatric symptoms, including psychosis, depression, and anxiety. The scale content is
available at BPRS.
(10) HAMA (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale). A clinician-administered scale used to measure
the severity of anxiety symptoms based on observed and reported behaviors. The scale content is
available at HAMA.
(11) HAMD (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale). A clinician-rated tool that assesses the severity
of depressive symptoms, widely used in clinical and research settings. The scale content is available
at HAMD-24. In this study, we employ the Chinese version of the HAMD-24, which features a
different question order compared to the English version.
(12) MCCB (MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery). A comprehensive, clinician-administered
battery of tests designed to measure cognitive functioning in individuals with schizophrenia and other
psychiatric disorders. The scale content is available at MCCB.
(13) YMRS (Young Mania Rating Scale). A clinician-rated scale used to assess the severity of
manic symptoms in individuals with bipolar disorder. The scale content is available at YMRS.

B.2.2    Relevant Question Selection
We calculated the correlation scores between each question and the total score across the 13 scales
mentioned above, as well as their correlation with the presence of mood disorders, using a training
set of 2,243 cases. The results are presented below:




                                                 21
Question ID   Correlation Score   PC p-value          Question ID       Correlation Score   PC p-value
                  1. CTQ                                das_Q31              0.3770          4.3e-76
  ctq_Q1           0.1771           3.9e-17             das_Q32              0.3108          4.9e-51
  ctq_Q2           0.1259           2.5e-09             das_Q33              0.2986          4.8e-47
  ctq_Q3           0.2428           3.1e-31             das_Q34              0.2978          8.5e-47
  ctq_Q4           0.2000           1.6e-21             das_Q35              0.1615          1.8e-14
  ctq_Q5           0.0914           1.6e-05             das_Q36              0.2307          2.9e-28
  ctq_Q6           0.1797           1.3e-17             das_Q37              0.2021          6.1e-22
  ctq_Q7           0.2371           8.0e-30             das_Q38              0.2937          1.6e-45
  ctq_Q8           0.4358          7.5e-104             das_Q39              0.2404          1.2e-30
  ctq_Q9           0.1150           5.3e-08             das_Q40              0.2141          1.7e-24
 ctq_Q10           0.3248          7.6e-56           das_total_score         0.4389          2.0e-105
 ctq_Q11           0.2805          1.6e-41                               3. GAD-7
 ctq_Q12           0.2726          3.1e-39             gad7_Q1               0.4377          1.1e-104
 ctq_Q13           0.2751          6.2e-40             gad7_Q2               0.4492          8.3e-111
 ctq_Q14           0.3973          4.6e-85             gad7_Q3               0.4393          1.6e-105
 ctq_Q15           0.2841          1.4e-42             gad7_Q4               0.4522          2.0e-112
 ctq_Q16           -0.2860         3.7e-43             gad7_Q5               0.3891           3.3e-81
 ctq_Q17           0.1306          6.3e-10             gad7_Q6               0.4661          2.9e-120
 ctq_Q18           0.3640          1.0e-70             gad7_Q7               0.3493           8.9e-65
 ctq_Q19           0.2959          3.2e-46          gad7_total_score         0.5116          1.7e-148
 ctq_Q20           0.1276          1.5e-09                              4. HCL-32
 ctq_Q21           0.0810          1.3e-04              hcl32_Q1              0.0179         4.0e-01
 ctq_Q22           -0.2533         6.3e-34              hcl32_Q2             -0.1972         5.9e-21
 ctq_Q23           0.1246          3.7e-09              hcl32_Q3             -0.2632         1.3e-36
 ctq_Q24           0.1690          9.9e-16              hcl32_Q4             -0.2292         6.5e-28
 ctq_Q25           0.3855          8.7e-80              hcl32_Q5             -0.1799         1.2e-17
 ctq_Q26           0.1815          6.3e-18              hcl32_Q6             -0.1501         1.1e-12
 ctq_Q27           0.0478          2.4e-02              hcl32_Q7              0.0251         2.4e-01
 ctq_Q28           0.3101          8.0e-51              hcl32_Q8              0.2175         3.1e-25
                  2. DAS                                hcl32_Q9             -0.0151         4.8e-01
  das_Q1            0.2455         6.9e-32             hcl32_Q10             -0.2148         1.2e-24
  das_Q2            0.0296         1.6e-01             hcl32_Q11             -0.1509         8.2e-13
  das_Q3            0.2930         2.7e-45             hcl32_Q12             -0.2202         7.4e-26
  das_Q4            0.3332         8.1e-59             hcl32_Q13             -0.2187         1.7e-25
  das_Q5            0.2801         2.2e-41             hcl32_Q14             -0.0594         5.0e-03
  das_Q6            0.1511         7.7e-13             hcl32_Q15             -0.2313         2.0e-28
  das_Q7            0.3111         4.1e-51             hcl32_Q16              0.0177         4.0e-01
  das_Q8            0.3161         8.1e-53             hcl32_Q17             -0.0184         3.9e-01
  das_Q9            0.3706         2.3e-73             hcl32_Q18             -0.1769         4.2e-17
 das_Q10            0.3823         2.4e-78             hcl32_Q19             -0.2283         1.0e-27
 das_Q11            0.3618         8.6e-70             hcl32_Q20             -0.1844         1.8e-18
 das_Q12            0.1682         1.4e-15             hcl32_Q21              0.1239         4.5e-09
 das_Q13            0.2901         2.1e-44             hcl32_Q22             -0.2486         1.0e-32
 das_Q14            0.3695         6.1e-73             hcl32_Q23              0.0968         4.7e-06
 das_Q15            0.3308         6.0e-58             hcl32_Q24             -0.1985         3.2e-21
 das_Q16            0.3399         2.8e-61             hcl32_Q25              0.2063         8.0e-23
 das_Q17           -0.2876         1.2e-43             hcl32_Q26              0.1971         6.2e-21
 das_Q18           -0.0604         4.4e-03             hcl32_Q27              0.1479         2.3e-12
 das_Q19            0.3015         5.4e-48             hcl32_Q28             -0.2751         6.2e-40
 das_Q20            0.2773         1.4e-40             hcl32_Q29              0.0465         2.8e-02
 das_Q21            0.1974         5.6e-21             hcl32_Q30             -0.0205         3.3e-01
 das_Q22            0.2228         2.0e-26             hcl32_Q31              0.0117         5.8e-01
 das_Q23            0.3144         3.0e-52             hcl32_Q32              0.0905         1.9e-05
 das_Q24            0.0429         4.3e-02          hcl32_total_score        -0.0788         2.0e-04
 das_Q25           -0.0428         4.3e-02                                5. MDQ
 das_Q26            0.3093         1.6e-50              mdq_Q1                0.1832         3.0e-18
 das_Q27            0.3224         5.7e-55              mdq_Q2                0.2916         7.3e-45
 das_Q28            0.2095         1.7e-23              mdq_Q3               -0.1594         3.9e-14
 das_Q29            0.1205         1.2e-08              mdq_Q4                0.2980         7.4e-47
 das_Q30            0.0003         9.9e-01              mdq_Q5                0.0515         1.5e-02




                                               22
  Question ID       Correlation Score   PC p-value          Question ID      Correlation Score   PC p-value
   mdq_Q6                -0.0556         8.8e-03              bprs_Q5              0.4761         2.7e-127
   mdq_Q7                 0.2141         1.8e-24              bprs_Q6              0.1560          1.1e-13
   mdq_Q8                -0.1568         1.0e-13              bprs_Q7              0.0003          9.9e-01
   mdq_Q9                -0.1437         9.7e-12              bprs_Q8              0.1869          4.3e-19
  mdq_Q10                 0.0857         5.2e-05              bprs_Q9              0.6200         1.8e-238
  mdq_Q11                 0.0907         1.8e-05             bprs_Q10              0.1341         1.8e-10
  mdq_Q12                 0.2022         5.8e-22             bprs_Q11              0.3040         3.4e-49
  mdq_Q13                 0.2920         5.6e-45             bprs_Q12              0.1088         2.4e-07
mdq_total_score           0.1742         1.3e-16             bprs_Q13              0.3225         1.8e-55
                      6. NSSI                                bprs_Q14              0.0363         8.5e-02
   nssi_Q1                0.4597         4.0e-116            bprs_Q15              0.0224         2.9e-01
   nssi_Q2                0.3568          1.9e-67            bprs_Q16              0.0859         4.6e-05
   nssi_Q3                0.0221          3.0e-01            bprs_Q17              0.2906         6.5e-45
   nssi_Q4                0.1636          9.5e-15            bprs_Q18             -0.0506         1.7e-02
   nssi_Q5                0.4422         1.4e-106         bprs_total_score         0.4724         4.2e-125
   nssi_Q6                0.2471          3.8e-32                            10. HAMA
   nssi_Q7                0.3085          5.4e-50            hama_Q1              0.4227           6.2e-98
   nssi_Q8                0.3112          6.5e-51            hama_Q2              0.4177           1.9e-95
   nssi_Q9                0.4045          6.8e-88            hama_Q3              0.2960           1.3e-46
   nssi_Q10               0.3417          1.3e-61            hama_Q4              0.5099          8.7e-149
   nssi_Q11               0.2181          3.1e-25            hama_Q5              0.4987          2.2e-141
   nssi_Q12               0.2392          3.7e-30            hama_Q6              0.6304          7.4e-249
   nssi_Q13               0.2664          2.8e-37            hama_Q7              0.2840           6.9e-43
   nssi_Q14               0.2641          1.3e-36            hama_Q8              0.2837           8.2e-43
   nssi_Q15               0.0729          6.0e-04            hama_Q9              0.3875           2.7e-81
   nssi_Q16              -0.0825          1.0e-04           hama_Q10              0.3994          1.0e-86
   nssi_Q17               0.1995          2.7e-21           hama_Q11              0.3641          2.7e-71
   nssi_Q18               0.0267          2.1e-01           hama_Q12              0.1479          1.9e-12
                     7. PHQ-9                               hama_Q13              0.2420          2.8e-31
   phq9_Q1               0.5008          9.0e-143           hama_Q14              0.1529          3.3e-13
   phq9_Q2               0.5006          1.2e-142         hama_total_score        0.5513          1.2e-178
   phq9_Q3               0.4842          3.2e-132                            11. HAMD
   phq9_Q4               0.5097          1.2e-148            hamd_Q1              0.6021          8.1e-219
   phq9_Q5               0.4484          1.9e-111            hamd_Q2              0.4958          6.5e-138
   phq9_Q6               0.4877          1.9e-134            hamd_Q3              0.6024          4.1e-219
   phq9_Q7               0.4578          1.1e-116            hamd_Q4              0.5247          4.3e-157
   phq9_Q8               0.4493          6.6e-112            hamd_Q5              0.4385          7.2e-105
   phq9_Q9               0.5057          5.4e-146            hamd_Q6              0.3932           6.9e-83
phq9_total_score         0.5920          2.7e-212            hamd_Q7              0.6070          2.8e-223
                     8. SHAPS                                hamd_Q8              0.3943           2.4e-83
    shaps_Q1             0.1860          8.4e-19             hamd_Q9              0.3444           9.0e-63
    shaps_Q2             0.2637          8.5e-37            hamd_Q10              0.4053           2.1e-88
    shaps_Q3             0.2561          1.0e-34            hamd_Q11              0.4846          6.5e-131
    shaps_Q4             0.2186          1.6e-25            hamd_Q12              0.4143           1.1e-92
    shaps_Q5             0.1925          4.7e-20            hamd_Q13              0.4448          3.3e-108
    shaps_Q6             0.1774          3.1e-17            hamd_Q14              0.1405           3.0e-11
    shaps_Q7             0.2355          1.8e-29            hamd_Q15              0.1536           3.6e-13
    shaps_Q8             0.1430          1.2e-11            hamd_Q16              0.1968           8.5e-21
    shaps_Q9             0.2753          4.7e-40            hamd_Q17              0.2599           1.5e-35
   shaps_Q10             0.1845          1.6e-18            hamd_Q18              0.2671           1.5e-37
   shaps_Q11             0.2522          1.1e-33            hamd_Q19              0.3108           7.6e-51
   shaps_Q12             0.2314          1.7e-28            hamd_Q20              0.2943           1.6e-45
   shaps_Q13             0.1941          2.3e-20            hamd_Q21              0.2604           1.1e-35
   shaps_Q14             0.1587          4.7e-14            hamd_Q22              0.5236          2.3e-156
shaps_total_score        0.2675          7.4e-38            hamd_Q23              0.4595          3.2e-116
                      9. BPRS                               hamd_Q24              0.4293          3.9e-100
    bprs_Q1              0.1675          1.4e-15          hamd_total_score        0.6348          2.2e-250
    bprs_Q2              0.4255          2.2e-99                             12. MCCB
    bprs_Q3              0.1035          8.9e-07              TMT-A               0.2300          4.6e-28
    bprs_Q4              0.0232          2.7e-01              TMT-B               0.1530          4.2e-13




                                                     23
                                                     Question ID               Correlation Score               PC p-value
                                                      BACS SC                          -0.2589                   2.3e-35
                                                      HVLT-R.1                         -0.0672                   1.5e-03
                                                      HVLT-R.2                          0.0157                   4.6e-01
                                                      HVLT-R.3                          0.0536                   1.1e-02
                                                     WMS-III SS                        -0.1140                   7.1e-08
                                                     NAB Mazes                         -0.1402                   3.1e-11
                                                     BVMT-R.1                          -0.0217                   3.1e-01
                                                     BVMT-R.2                          -0.0255                   2.3e-01
                                                     BVMT-R.3                          -0.0510                   1.6e-02
                                                       Fluency                         -0.0489                   2.1e-02
                                                     MSCEIT ME                         -0.2084                   3.2e-23
                                                      CPT-IP.1                         -0.2915                   8.8e-45
                                                      CPT-IP.2                         -0.3012                   8.2e-48
                                                      CPT-IP.3                         -0.2747                   9.2e-40
                                                                                 13. YMRS
                                                      ymrs_Q1                           0.2262                   1.1e-20
                                                      ymrs_Q2                           0.2100                   5.3e-18
                                                      ymrs_Q3                           0.0520                   3.4e-02
                                                      ymrs_Q4                           0.1925                   2.6e-15
                                                      ymrs_Q5                           0.3067                   1.9e-37
                                                      ymrs_Q6                           0.2548                   5.3e-26
                                                      ymrs_Q7                           0.1239                   4.1e-07
                                                      ymrs_Q8                           0.1106                   6.4e-06
                                                      ymrs_Q9                           0.1501                   8.0e-10
                                                     ymrs_Q10                          -0.0730                   2.9e-03
                                                     ymrs_Q11                           0.0900                   2.4e-04
                                                   ymrs_total_score                     0.3196                   1.0e-40



To ensure the selection of highly relevant questions, we identified the top 5% of questions with the
highest correlation coefficients. The distribution of correlation scores and the selection threshold
are illustrated in Figure 2. Question IDs with correlation scores above the threshold are highlighted
in purple, and their corresponding correlation scores are bolded for emphasis. Upon reviewing the
original questions selected, we observed that they naturally clustered into five distinct categories:
five questions related to depressive mood, two related to suicidal tendencies, three related to loss of
interest, two related to anxiety, and two related to insomnia.

                                                   - - - threshold: 0.5032

                                          40

                                          35
                                               0




                           unoEesuoqsanba1
                                         eus
                                               3




                           #
                                               5
                                               2


                                               0
                                               2


                                               5
                                               1



                                           10

                                               5




                                                   -0.4           -0.2           0.0               0.2         0.4         0.6
                                                                             correlati on of scale questions


              Figure 2: The correlation distribution and threshold of related questions.

Notably, for questions related to depressive mood and loss of interest, we observed variations in
how similar questions were phrased across different scales. To ensure robustness, we consulted
our domain expert co-author and decided to include two additional questions from the self-reported
PHQ-9 depression scale: phq9_Q2 (depressed mood over the past two weeks) and phq9_Q1 (loss
of interest over the past two weeks). We highlight these two question IDs in teal. Although their
correlation scores (0.5006 and 0.5008, respectively) were slightly below the threshold of 0.5032,


                                                                                      24
their inclusion provides valuable insights and enhances the diagnostic framework. This decision
underscores the importance of multi-scale assessment in minimizing misjudgments of clients’ mental
states, reducing the impact of short-term emotional fluctuations, and mitigating potential inaccuracies
due to inconsistent responses. By repeating similar questions across self-reported and clinician-rated
scales, we can achieve a more comprehensive and reliable evaluation. The detailed content and
options of selected questions are listed in Table 7.




                                                  25
                   Table 7: Question content and options of selected scale questions.

Question ID            Correlation   Question Content                               Options
                                                   Depression-related Performances
hamd_total_score       0.6348        The total score of Hamilton Depression         0-6 = no depression, 7-16 = may have depression, 17-23 =
                                     Rating Scale (HAMD).                           must have depression, 24-76 = severe depression
hama_Q6                0.6304        Depressed mood. Loss of interest, lack         0 = Not present, 1 = Mild, 2 = Moderate, 3 = Severe, 4 =
                                     of pleasure in hobbies, depression, early      Very severe.
                                     waking, diurnal swing.
bprs_Q9                0.6200        DEPRESSIVE MOOD. Despondency in                0 = not assessed, 1 = not present, 2 = very mild, 3 = mild, 4
                                     mood, sadness. Rate only degree of de-         = moderate, 5 = moderately severe, 6 = severe, 7 = extremely
                                     spondency; do not rate on the basis of         severe
                                     inferences concerning depression based
                                     upon general retardation and somatic com-
                                     plaints.
hamd_Q1                0.6021        DEPRESSED MOOD (sadness, hopeless,             0 = Absent. 1 = These feeling states indicated only on
                                     helpless, worthless)                           questioning. 2 = These feeling states spontaneously reported
                                                                                    verbally. 3 = Communicates feeling states non-verbally, i.e.
                                                                                    through facial expression, posture, voice and tendency to
                                                                                    weep. 4 = Patient reports virtually only these feeling states in
                                                                                    his/her spontaneous verbal and non-verbal communication.
phq9_total_score       0.592         The total score of Patient Health              0-4 = minimal depression, 5-9 = mild depression, 10-14 =
                                     Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9).                       moderate depression, 15-19 = moderately severe depression,
                                                                                    20-27 = severe depression
phq9_Q2                0.5006        Over the last 2 weeks, how often have          0 = Not at all, 1= Several days, 2 = More than half the days,
                                     you been bothered by any of the following      3 = Nearly every day
                                     problems? Feeling down, depressed, or
                                     hopeless.
                                                     Suicide-related Performances
hamd_Q3                0.6024        SUICIDE                                        0 = Absent. 1 = Feels life is not worth living. 2 = Wishes
                                                                                    he/she were dead or any thoughts of possible death to self. 3
                                                                                    = Ideas or gestures of suicide. 4 = Attempts at suicide (any
                                                                                    serious attempt rate 4).
phq9_Q9                0.5007        Over the last 2 weeks, how often have          0 = Not at all, 1= Several days, 2 = More than half the days,
                                     you been bothered by any of the following      3 = Nearly every day
                                     problems? Thoughts that you would be
                                     better off dead, or of hurting yourself.
                                                Energy&Interest-related Performances
hamd_Q7                0.607         Work and Activities                            0 = No difficulty, 1= Thoughts and feelings of incapacity,
                                                                                    fatigue, or weakness related to activities, work, or hobbies,
                                                                                    only reported when asked, 2 = Spontaneously reports loss
                                                                                    of interest in activities, work, or hobbies, either directly or
                                                                                    indirectly, such as feeling listless, indecisive, or needing to
                                                                                    push themselves to work or engage in activities, 3 = Decrease
                                                                                    in actual time spent in activities or decrease in productivity;
                                                                                    in a hospital setting, rate 3 if the patient does not spend at
                                                                                    least three hours a day in activities, exclusive of ward chores,
                                                                                    4 = Stopped working due to the current illness; in a hospital
                                                                                    setting, rate 4 if the patient engages in no activities except
                                                                                    ward chores or if the patient fails to perform ward chores
                                                                                    unassisted.
hamd_Q22               0.5236        Feelings of Inadequacy or Reduced Abil-        0 = Absent, 1 = Subjective feelings of inadequacy only
                                     ity                                            elicited on questioning, 2 = Patient spontaneously reports
                                                                                    feelings of inadequacy), 3 = Needs encouragement, guid-
                                                                                    ance, and reassurance to complete daily tasks or personal
                                                                                    hygiene, 4 = Requires assistance from others for dressing,
                                                                                    grooming, eating, making the bed, or personal hygiene.
phq9_Q4                0.5097        Over the last 2 weeks, how often have          0 = Not at all, 1= Several days, 2 = More than half the days,
                                     you been bothered by any of the following      3 = Nearly every day
                                     problems? Feeling tired or having little
                                     energy.
phq9_Q1                0.5008        Over the last 2 weeks, how often have          0 = Not at all, 1 = Several days, 2 = More than half the days,
                                     you been bothered by any of the following      3 = Nearly every day
                                     problems? Little interest or pleasure in do-
                                     ing things.
                                                     Anxiety-related Performances
hama_total_score       0.5513        The total score of Hamilton Anxiety Rat-       0-6 = no anxiety, 7-13 = may have anxiety, 14-20 = must
                                     ing Scale (HAM-A).                             have anxiety, 21-28 = must have obvious anxiety, 29-56 =
                                                                                    severe anxiety
gad7_total             0.5185        The total score of Generalized Anxiety         0-4 = no anxiety, 5-9 = mild anxiety, 10-14 = moderate
                                     Disorder-7(GAD-7).                             anxiety, 15-21 = severe anxiety
                                                    Insomnia-related Performances
hamd_Q4                0.5247        INSOMNIA: EARLY IN THE NIGHT                   0 = No difficulty falling asleep. 1 = Complains of occasional
                                                                                    difficulty falling asleep, i.e. more than half an hour. 2 =
                                                                                    Complaints of nightly difficulty falling asleep.
hama_Q4                0.5099        Insomnia. Difficulty in falling asleep, bro-   0 = Not present, 1 = Mild, 2 = Moderate, 3 = Severe, 4 =
                                     ken sleep, unsatisfying sleep and fatigue      Very severe.
                                     on waking, dreams, nightmares, night ter-
                                     rors.




                                                                  26
B.3     Retrieval Datastore


B.3.1    Mental Disorders


In this section, we provide a brief overview of 18 common mental disorders, along with examples of
their typical symptoms as outlined in the DSM-5. It is important to note that mental disorders are
complex, and their manifestations often extend beyond the descriptions provided here. The following
content is intended to offer a general understanding of these conditions and should not be considered
exhaustive or definitive.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders. The neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of conditions with
onset in the developmental period. The range of developmental deficits varies from very specific
limitations of learning or control of executive functions to global impairments of social skills or
intelligence. For example, individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders may have difficulties in
speech and language development, problems with social communication and understanding social
cues, repetitive behaviors, and restricted interests.
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders. Schizophrenia spectrum disorders are
characterized by a range of symptoms that affect thinking, perception, emotional regulation, and
behavior. For example, individuals with auditory hallucinations would hear voices that others do not.
Bipolar and Related Disorders. Bipolar and related disorders are characterized by significant
mood swings that include episodes of mania or hypomania (elevated mood) and depression. For
example, individuals with mania may experience an abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood, increased energy, reduced need for sleep, grandiosity, impulsivity, and excessive engagement
in risky behaviors.
Depressive Disorders. Depressive disorders are characterized by persistent feelings of sadness,
hopelessness, and a loss of interest or pleasure in most activities. For example, individuals with
depression may experience changes in appetite or weight, sleep disturbances (either insomnia or
excessive sleeping), fatigue, feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt, difficulty concentrating, and
thoughts of death or suicide.
Anxiety Disorders. Anxiety disorders are characterized by excessive fear, worry, or nervousness that
is disproportionate to the actual threat or situation. For example, individuals with generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD) experience chronic, uncontrollable worry about various aspects of life, such as work,
health, or social interactions.
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders are
characterized by the presence of obsessions (intrusive, unwanted thoughts) and/or compulsions
(repetitive behaviors or mental acts performed to reduce anxiety). For example, individuals with
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) experience persistent, distressing obsessions and feel com-
pelled to perform rituals or routines to alleviate the anxiety caused by these thoughts.
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders. Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders are charac-
terized by the emotional and psychological response to traumatic or stressful events. For example,
individuals with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) intrusive memories of the trauma (flash-
backs, nightmares), emotional numbness, avoidance of reminders of the event, hypervigilance, and
heightened arousal, such as irritability, difficulty sleeping, and exaggerated startle responses.
Dissociative Disorders. Dissociative disorders are characterized by disruptions or breakdowns in
memory, consciousness, identity, or perception. For example, individuals with Dissociative Identity
Disorder (DID), previously known as Multiple Personality Disorder, exhibit two or more distinct
identities or personality states, each with its own pattern of thinking, feeling, and behaving. These
identities may take control of the person’s behavior and are often accompanied by gaps in memory or
awareness of time.
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders are character-
ized by the presence of physical symptoms that cause significant distress or impairment, which are
not fully explained by a medical condition. For example, individuals with Illness Anxiety Disorder
(formerly known as hypochondriasis) may experience excessive worry about having or developing a
serious illness, despite having little or no physical symptoms.


                                                   27
Feeding and Eating Disorders Feeding and Eating Disorders are characterized by persistent distur-
bances in eating behaviors and related thoughts or emotions that negatively impact physical health,
emotional well-being, and daily functioning. For example, individuals with Anorexia Nervosa have
an intense fear of gaining weight and engage in restrictive eating, leading to significantly low body
weight. They may also have a distorted body image, perceiving themselves as overweight even when
underweight.
Elimination Disorders Elimination Disorders are characterized by the inappropriate elimination of
urine or feces, which are not due to a medical condition. For example, individuals with enuresis refers
to the repeated involuntary or intentional voiding of urine, typically at night (bedwetting), beyond the
expected age for bladder control.
Sleep-Wake Disorders Sleep-Wake Disorders are characterized by disturbances in the quality, timing,
and amount of sleep, leading to significant impairment in daytime functioning and distress. These
disorders are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition.
For example, individuals with insomnia disorder experience persistent difficulty falling asleep, staying
asleep, or achieving restorative sleep, despite adequate opportunity for sleep, resulting in fatigue,
mood disturbances, and impaired cognitive or social functioning.
Sexual Dysfunctions Sexual Dysfunctions are characterized by a clinically significant inability
to participate in or experience satisfaction from sexual activity, often causing marked distress or
interpersonal difficulties. These dysfunctions are not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder,
relationship distress, or the effects of a substance or medical condition. For example, individuals
with erectile disorder experience a persistent or recurrent inability to attain or maintain an adequate
erection during sexual activity, leading to significant distress or interpersonal strain.
Gender Dysphoria Gender Dysphoria involves a strong and persistent discomfort with one’s assigned
gender at birth and a desire to be treated as the opposite gender. This condition is marked by significant
distress or impairment in functioning due to the incongruence between experienced or expressed
gender and assigned gender. For example, a person assigned female at birth may experience intense
discomfort with their body, wishing to transition to a male gender identity, often leading to emotional
and social distress.
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders These disorders are characterized by persis-
tent patterns of behavior where the rights of others or societal norms are violated. Individuals with
these disorders often exhibit aggressive, antisocial, or impulsive behaviors that disrupt their social,
academic, or occupational functioning. For example, a child with conduct disorder may frequently
engage in theft, aggression toward others, or deliberate property destruction, showing little empathy
or remorse for their actions.
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders encompass
a range of problems caused by the use of substances (e.g., alcohol, drugs) or behaviors (e.g., gambling)
that lead to addiction. These disorders are defined by a pattern of substance use or behavior that
leads to significant impairment, including physical, social, or psychological problems. For example,
an individual with alcohol use disorder may find themselves drinking excessively despite negative
consequences, such as relationship issues or health problems, and may experience withdrawal
symptoms when not drinking.
Neurocognitive Disorders Neurocognitive Disorders involve a decline in cognitive function that
represents a significant change from a previous level of functioning. These disorders can affect
memory, learning, attention, executive function, and perception. For example, Alzheimer’s disease
is a common neurocognitive disorder where individuals experience progressive memory loss and
confusion, often leading to difficulty performing everyday tasks.
Personality Disorders Personality Disorders are characterized by enduring patterns of behavior,
cognition, and inner experience that deviate markedly from the expectations of an individual’s culture.
These patterns are inflexible and pervasive, leading to distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning. For example, individuals with borderline personality disorder
may have intense and unstable relationships, fear of abandonment, and difficulty regulating their
emotions, often leading to impulsive actions or self-harming behaviors.




                                                   28
B.3.2      Knowledge Base Construction

To gather professional diagnostic criteria, we rely on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders: DSM-5 [15], a comprehensive and authoritative guide widely used by clinicians and
researchers. The DSM-5 outlines the standardized criteria for the classification and diagnosis of
mental disorders, providing detailed descriptions of symptoms, diagnostic features, and associated
conditions. As a crucial tool in psychiatry, it ensures consistency and accuracy in mental health
diagnosis, making it an essential reference for both clinical practice and research.
Our knowledge base is built by extracting diagnostic criteria and symptoms from the DSM-5, focusing
on mood disorders and other conditions. We reference the diagnostic criteria section to identify
required symptoms and their severity, and the differential diagnosis section to distinguish mood
disorders from similar conditions. This ensures accurate diagnosis while addressing symptom
overlaps.
Diagnostic Criteria Extraction. Symptoms in the DSM-5 are listed individually. To facilitate
comparison with client records, we reframe these using GPT-4o for brevity and clarity, ensuring
independent, complete criteria. We extracted symptoms for 18 common mental disorders, including
all major symptoms of "bipolar and related disorders" and "depressive disorders." The extraction
prompt is provided in Table 8.


                                    Table 8: Prompts of diagnostic criteria extraction.
        To facilitate comparison between diagnostic criteria and medical records, please summarize the criteria for {disease name}
        from the DSM-5 diagnostic manual in a point-by-point format. Each point should fully describe a symptom, explicitly include
        reference information where necessary, and retain age or other relevant restrictions.
        Below is the description of the diagnostic criteria for {disease name} from the DSM-5: {the original criteria}.




For example, one symptom of bipolar disorder is as follows:
"A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnor-
mally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy, lasting at least 1 week and present
most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary)."
The extracted symptom description would be:
"Manic episode: Elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, accompanied by increased energy and
activity, lasting at least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day."
Differential Criteria Extraction. We decompose complex differential diagnosis into distinct
expressions using GPT-4o. This process ensures precise differentiation between mood disorder and
other diseases. The extraction prompt is provided in Table 9.


                                   Table 9: Prompts of differential criteria extraction.
        Please split the following differential criteria into two separate diagnostic criteria. Each point should fully describe a symptom,
        explicitly include reference information where necessary, and retain age or other relevant restrictions.
        Below are the differential criteria to be split: the original criteria.




For example, a differential symptom for bipolar disorder is described as:
"Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. This disorder may be misdiagnosed as bipolar disorder,
especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms overlap with the symptoms of mania, such
as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need for sleep. The ’double counting’ of
symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether
the symptom(s) represent a distinct episode."
This description was refined into two distinct expressions:
"Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need
for sleep in adolescents and children."
"Bipolar disorder: rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need for sleep in adults."


                                                                       29
B.3.3   Knowledge Base Evaluation
We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of the knowledge base to ensure the accuracy and com-
pleteness of the symptom descriptions for all entries, with a particular focus on the sections covering
"bipolar and related disorders" and "depressive disorders." The evaluation involved assessing the
correctness of each symptom description and verifying the completeness of the content within these
two critical sections. Any inaccuracies or gaps identified during this process were manually revised
to ensure the highest quality of information.




                                                  30
C     Agent Details
C.1     Three Diagnostic Variants

In this section, we provide prompts of Angel.R, Angel.D and Angel.C in Table 10.


                               Table 10: Prompts of Angel.R, Angel.D and Angel.C.
      Role: You are a psychiatry diagnosis expert.
      Objective: Diagnose whether the visitor {digit_id} has a mood disorder (including depression and bipolar disorder), which is
      characterized by depressive or manic symptoms.
      Constraints:
      1. You may only use the following actions.
      2. You must act proactively. Always keep this in mind when planning actions.
      Available Actions:
      Three variants of angels are different in actions. Angel.R: 1,2,7; Angel.D: 1,2,3,4,7; Angel.C: 1,2,5,6,7.
      1. toggle_visitor_record: Retrieves structured medical records for the visitor, if available. Also extracts top-5 symptoms related to
      DSM-5 diagnostic criteria. Args: {"name":"digit_id", "description":"Visitor ID, must be provided in the query", "type":"int"}
      2. get_scale_performances: Retrieves the visitor’s performance on the top 5% most mood disorder-related questions from
      psychological scales. The correlation score represents the statistical relevance to mood disorders. Args: {"name":"digit_id",
      "description":"Visitor ID, must be provided in the query", "type":"int"}
      3. previous_cases_display: If the visitor has medical record information, this tool compares the case with past structured medical
      records in the database and extracts the top 5 most similar cases. Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis, the
      extracted similar cases are for reference only. Args: {"name": "digit_id", "description": "Visitor ID, must be provided in the
      query", "type": "int"}
      4. previous_scales_display: This tool compares the visitor’s scale performance with past case scale performances in the database,
      and extracts the top 5 most similar cases. Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis, the extracted similar cases are
      for reference only. Args: {"name": "digit_id", "description": "Visitor ID, must be provided in the query", "type": "int"}
      5. previous_cases_analysis: If the visitor has medical record information, this tool compares the case with past structured medical
      records in the database, extracts and analyzes the top 5 most similar cases. Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis,
      the extracted similar cases are for reference only. Args: {"name": "digit_id", "description": "Visitor ID, must be provided in the
      query", "type": "int"}
      6. previous_scales_analysis: This tool returns a comparison of the visitor’s scale performance with past case scale performances
      in the database, extracts and analyzes the top 5 most similar cases. Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis, the
      extracted similar cases are for reference only. Args: {"name": "digit_id", "description": "Visitor ID, must be provided in the
      query", "type": "int"}
      7. Finish: Completes the diagnosis process. Args:{"answer":‘yes’ or ‘no’ (indicating whether the visitor has a mood disorder)",
      "reasons":"A summary of key reasons supporting the decision."}
      Resources: You are a large language model trained on vast textual data, including factual medical knowledge.
      Best Practices:
      1. Always refer to similar cases (medical records or scale data) for diagnosis. However, do not over-rely on past diagnoses due to
      the personalized nature of mental health conditions.
      2. Consider all available information (medical records & scale performance). Always examine similar records (if available) and
      similar scale data for reference. Do not rely solely on one data source.
      3. Prioritize clinical evaluation over self-reported scales in case of contradictions. Self-reported terms like "occasionally",
      "sometimes", and "frequently" are subjective, making it difficult for visitors to assess their condition accurately.
      4. Only consider symptoms relevant to mood disorders. The visitor may have other mental disorders that are not classified as
      mood disorders.
      5. Mood disorders include only depression and bipolar disorder, characterized by depressive or manic symptoms.
      Response Format:
      Generate a JSON string following the structure below. Do not include any extra text or explanation. {"action": {"name":
      "action name", "args": {"args name": "args value"}}, "thoughts": {"plan": "Briefly describe the list of short-term and long-term
      plans", "criticism": "Constructive self-criticism", "observation": "Summary of the current step returned to the user", "reasoning":
      "Reasoning behind the decision"}}




C.2     Symptom Matching

C.2.1     Medical Record Processing
To ensure patient privacy, the medical records presented in this section have been anonymized, with
all event details adapted while preserving the patient’s actual symptoms. The original medical record
(adapted) and the corresponding processing steps are illustrated in Figure 3.
Effective psychiatric diagnosis relies on comprehensive and well-structured patient information.
However, raw medical records often contain scattered, redundant, or sensitive details that can hinder
accurate analysis. To address these challenges, we designed a systematic medical record processing
pipeline that ensures data security, enhances temporal reasoning, and improves symptom extraction for
LLM-based agents. This pipeline consists of four key steps: extracting essential diagnostic elements,
refining present illness descriptions to prevent data leakage, integrating structured information for
coherence, and an optimal step of reorganizing records into a structured format for precise symptom
matching. The processing prompts are provided in Table 11.


                                                                      31
                          Step 1. Raw Data Extraction.                                         Step 2. Present Illness Processing.

            Gender: male                                                            Gender: male
            Age: 19                                                                 Age: 19
            Occupation: college student                                             Occupation: college student
            Visit Date: 2023.5.10                                                   Visit Date: 2023.5.10
            Chief complaint: Emotional instability for 3 years.                     Chief complaint: Emotional instability for 3 years.
            Present illness: On 2020.6.17, the patient began experiencing           Present illness: Approximately three years ago, the patient
            emotional instability due to academic stress, often crying,             began experiencing emotional instability due to academic
            feeling irritable, and having outbursts of anger. He was                stress, often crying, feeling irritable, and having outbursts of
            diagnosed with 'anxiety disorder' at another hospital and               anger. He was diagnosed with 'anxiety disorder' at another
            prescribed medications such as 'escitalopram and valproate.'            hospital and prescribed medications such as 'escitalopram and
            Despite treatment, his symptoms fluctuated. On 2022.4.18, he            valproate.' Despite treatment, his symptoms fluctuated. About
            sought outpatient care at our hospital and was prescribed               a year ago, he sought outpatient care at our hospital and was
            'lamotrigine, lithium carbonate, and aripiprazole,' which helped        prescribed 'lamotrigine, lithium carbonate, and aripiprazole,'
            stabilize his condition to some extent. In 2023.2, following a          which helped stabilize his condition to some extent. Three
            conflict with a close friend, his symptoms worsened. He                 months ago, following a conflict with a close friend, his
            exhibited emotional instability, frequent crying, irritability,         symptoms worsened. He exhibited emotional instability,
            rapid mood swings, and repeatedly attempted to reconcile with           frequent crying, irritability, rapid mood swings, and repeatedly
            the friend. When the friend declined, the patient engaged in            attempted to reconcile with the friend. When the friend
            self-harm behaviors, including overdosing on medication and             declined, the patient engaged in self-harm behaviors, including
            attempting to jump from a height (prevented by family). He is           overdosing on medication and attempting to jump from a
            now seeking further treatment at our outpatient clinic and              height (prevented by family). He is now seeking further
            admitted into our hostipal as bipolar disorder. Since the onset         treatment at our outpatient clinic and admitted into our hostipal
            of symptoms, the patient has remained alert, with a stable              as bipolar disorder. Since the onset of symptoms, the patient
            appetite, slightly disturbed sleep, normal bowel and bladder            has remained alert, with a stable appetite, slightly disturbed
            function, and no significant changes in energy levels or weight.        sleep, normal bowel and bladder function, and no significant
                                                                                    changes in energy levels or weight.




                      Step 3. Key Elements Combination.                                       Step 4. Medical Record Structuring.
                                                                                    {
            The patient is a 19-year-old male, currently a college student.
                                                                                      "symptoms": [
            Chief complaint: Emotional instability for 3 years. History of              "Emotional instability: The patient reported emotional
            present illness as reported by the patient's family:                    instability for 3 years, often crying and feeling irritable.",
            Approximately three years ago, the patient began experiencing               "Irritability: Rapid mood swings, frequent outbursts of anger,
            emotional instability due to academic stress, often crying,             and heightened irritability. ",
                                                                                        "Anxiety symptoms: Experienced anxiety due to academic
            feeling irritable, and having outbursts of anger. He was
                                                                                    stress, often accompanied by emotional outbursts and attempts
            diagnosed with 'anxiety disorder' at another hospital and               to reconcile interpersonal conflicts.",
            prescribed medications such as 'escitalopram and valproate.'                "Self-harm behaviors: The patient overdosed on medication
            Despite treatment, his symptoms fluctuated. About a year ago,           three times and attempted to jump from a height (prevented by
            he sought outpatient care at our hospital and was prescribed            family)."
                                                                                        "Sleep disturbances: Slightly disturbed sleep patterns."
            'lamotrigine, lithium carbonate, and aripiprazole,' which helped
                                                                                      ],
            stabilize his condition to some extent. Three months ago,                 "background": [
            following a conflict with a close friend, his symptoms                      "Patient is a 19-year-old male, currently a college student.",
            worsened. He exhibited emotional instability, frequent crying,              "Diagnosis and treatment: Diagnosed with anxiety disorder
            irritability, rapid mood swings, and repeatedly attempted to            three years ago, initially treated at another hospital and later at
                                                                                    our outpatient clinic. ",
            reconcile with the friend. When the friend declined, the patient
                                                                                        "Medication history: Escitalopram, valproate, lamotrigine,
            engaged in self-harm behaviors, including overdosing on                 lithium carbonate, and aripiprazole.",
            medication and attempting to jump from a height (prevented by               "Symptom recurrence: Symptoms worsened three months
            family). He is now seeking further treatment at our outpatient          ago following a conflict with a close friend."
            clinic. Since the onset of symptoms, the patient has remained               "Mental and physical state: Since the onset, the patient has
                                                                                    remained alert, with a stable appetite, normal bowel and
            alert, with a stable appetite, slightly disturbed sleep, normal
                                                                                    bladder function, and no significant changes in energy levels
            bowel and bladder function, and no significant changes in               or weight."
            energy levels or weight.                                                  ]
                                                                                    }



Figure 3: An example of the original medical record (adapted) and its corresponding processing
steps.


                                         Table 11: Prompts of medical record processing.
     Step 1 − → Step 2: Replace specific dates in the present illness history with relative time expressions based on the patient’s
     admission date. Avoid using exact dates after the replacement.
     Step 2 −→ Step 3: Organize the patient’s information into a single, coherent paragraph without altering the content of the present
     illness section.
     Step 3 −→ Step 4: Structure the medical record by extracting and summarizing the patient’s symptoms and background. List each
     item separately, using "-" as a delimiter. Respond only in JSON format.




Step 1. Raw Data Extraction. To construct a comprehensive and secure data store, we first obtained
anonymized client information from the hospital database. To capture the full context of clients’
backgrounds, which are critical for accurate diagnosis, we extracted the following key elements from
the medical records: (1) Gender: Essential for identifying gender-specific symptoms (e.g., menstrual-
related mood changes). (2) Age: Some disorders manifest at specific life stages, such as adolescence.
(3) Occupation: Helps differentiate disorder-related symptoms from external factors (e.g., shift work
causing sleep issues). (4) Visit Date: Provides a reference for interpreting time-sensitive information.
(5) Chief Complaint: A concise summary of primary symptoms. (6) Present illness: A detailed
symptom history, including medication usage.


                                                                               32
Step 2. Present Illness Processing. To prevent data leakage in agent diagnosis, we removed explicit
disorder labels from the present illness section. Additionally, absolute dates were converted into
relative timeframes based on the visit date (e.g., “9 months ago” instead of a specific date), enhancing
data privacy while facilitating temporal reasoning for symptom progression analysis.
Step 3. Key Elements Combination. To generate a coherent input for LLM-based analysis, we
integrate the structured elements from Step 1 with the processed present illness data from Step 2,
ensuring comprehensive contextual understanding.
Step 4. Medical Records Structurizing. Symptoms relevant to diagnosis are often dispersed across
different parts of medical records. For example, "suspecting others and perceiving malicious intent"
and "engaging in defensive behaviors" may appear separately, making direct symptom matching
difficult. To address this, we reorganize medical records into a structured format, presenting key
symptoms in JSON. We will compare whether coherent text or structured representation is more
effective for symptom matching and analysis in the ablation study (Section 4.3.1).

C.2.2    Symptom Matching Formulation
Symptom matching is to calculate the similarity of embedded medical records and diagnostic criteria.
The calculation involves transforming the structured medical record r into hidden states Hr via a
text encoder, expressed as er = norm(Hr [0]). Similarly, the embedding of each diagnostic criterion
c is obtained as ec = norm(Hc [0]). The similarity score of dense embedding sdense between the
structured record and each criterion is calculated by the inner product of the two embeddings er
and ec , expressed as sdense ← ⟨ec , er ⟩. This score provides a quantitative measure of the semantic
alignment between the client’s symptoms and the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.

C.3     Scale Performance Analysis

Client performances are converted from numeric scores to textual descriptions based on question
content and options, with an example of one question provided in Figure 4, and an example of all
related questions is provided in Figure 5.

                                                             "phq9_Q2_score": 2



                                             Over the past two weeks, how often have you been




                          Question Content
                                             bothered by any of the following problems?
                                             Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless.
                                             0 = Not at all
                                             1= Several days
                                             2 = More than half the days
                                             3 = Nearly every day



                                             [self-reported] In the second question of the PHQ-9
                                             questionnaire, the client self-reported that over the

                          Description
                                             past two weeks, they feel down, depressed, or hopeless
                                             more than half the days. The correlation score between
                                             this question and the presence of mood disorder is
                                             0.5006.

Figure 4: An example of generating scale performance description from the score value of a relevant
question.




                                                                    33
                                                                    Scale Performance Descriptions
                                The following are the performance of highly relevant questions in the [self-reported] and [clinician-
                                evaluated] scales, as well as the Pearson correlation coefficient between this question and the presence of
                                mood disorders in a statistical sense:
                                Depression-related Performances:
                                [clinician-evaluated] In the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD) filled out by the clinician during
       "hamd_total_score": 15   the consultation, the client scored 15 points (out of 76 points), indicating that the client may have depressive
                                symptoms. The correlation score between this and the presence of mood disorder is 0.6348.

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the sixth question of the HAMA questionnaire, the clinician assessed the client's
         "hama_Q6_score": 1     depressive mood (Loss of interest, lack of pleasure in hobbies, depression, early waking, diurnal swing.) as
                                mild. The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.6304.

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the ninth question of the BPRS scale, the clinician assessed the client's
          "bprs_Q9_score": 1    DEPRESSIVE MOOD (Despondency in mood, sadness. Rate only degree of despondency) as not present.
                                The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.62.

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the first question of the HAMD questionnaire, the clinician assessed the client's
         "hamd_Q1_score": 2     depressive mood as: These feeling states spontaneously reported verbally. The correlation score between
                                this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.6021.

                                [self-reported] In the self-rated Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), the client scored 8 points (out of a
        "phq9_total_score": 8   total of 27 points), indicating that the client may have mild depression. The correlation score between this
                                and the presence of mood disorder is 0.592.

                                [self-reported] In the second question of the PHQ-9 questionnaire, the client self-reported that over the past
          "phq9_Q2_score": 2    two weeks, they feel sad, depressed, or hopeless more than half the days. The correlation score between this
                                question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5006.

                                Suicide-related Performances:
                                [clinician-evaluated] In the third question of the HAMD questionnaire, the clinician assessed the client's
         "hamd_Q3_score": 0     suicidal tendencies as: none. The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder
                                is 0.6024.

                                [self-reported] In the ninth question of the PHQ-9 questionnaire, the client self-reported that over the past
         "phq9_Q9_score": 0     two weeks, they did not at all think that death or harming themselves in some way was a solution. The
                                correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5057.

                                Energy&Interest-related Performances:

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the 7th question of the HAMD questionnaire, the clinician rated the client's work
         "hamd_Q7_score": 1     and interests as: Thoughts and feelings of incapacity, fatigue, or weakness related to activities, work, or
                                hobbies, only reported when asked. The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood
                                disorder is 0.607.

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the 22nd question of the HAMD questionnaire, the clinician rated the client's
        "hamd_Q22_score": 2     Feelings of Inadequacy or Reduced Ability as: patient spontaneously reports feelings of inadequacy. The
                                correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5236.

                                [self-reported] In the 4th question of the PHQ-9 questionnaire, the client self-reported that over the past two
         "phq9_Q4_score": 2     weeks, they feel tired or having little energy more than half the days. The correlation score between this
                                question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5097.

                                [self-reported] In the 4th question of the PHQ-9 questionnaire, the client self-reported that over the past two
         "phq9_Q1_score": 2     weeks, they have little interest or pleasure in doing things more than half the days. The correlation score
                                between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5008.

                                Anxiety-related Performances:
                                [clinician-evaluated] In the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAMA) filled out by the doctor during the
       "hama_total_score": 11   consultation, the client scored 11 points (out of a total of 56 points), indicating that the client may have
                                anxiety. The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5513.

                                [self-reported] In the self-assessed Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7), the client scored 8 points (out
        "gad7_total_score": 8   of 21 points), indicating that the client has mild anxiety. The correlation score between this question and the
                                presence of mood disorder is 0.5185.
                                Insomia-related Performances:
                                [clinician-evaluated] In the fourth question of the HAMD questionnaire, the clinician assessed the client's
         "hamd_Q4_score": 0     INSOMNIA: EARLY IN THE NIGHT as: No difficulty falling asleep. The correlation score between this
                                question and the presence of mood disorder is 0.5247.

                                [clinician-evaluated] In the fourth question of the HAMA questionnaire, the clinician assessed the client's
         "hama_Q4_score": 1     Insomia (Difficulty in falling asleep, broken sleep, unsatisfying sleep and fatigue on waking, dreams,
                                nightmares, night terrors) as mild. The correlation score between this question and the presence of mood
                                disorder is 0.5099.



Figure 5: A full example of scale performance descriptions derived from the score values of mood
disorder-related questions.




                                                                       34
C.4     Multi-agent Diagnosis

In this section, we provide prompts of two debate agents in Table 12 and prompts of the judge in
Table 13.

                                             Table 12: Prompts of Debate Agents.
      Role: You are a psychiatry diagnosis expert. You believe the current visitor has (does not have) a mood disorder. Present
      your argument and persuade the opposing side.
      Visitor Information: This is a challenging case, and three agents have already provided their diagnoses:
      1. The agent without prior case retrieval believes the visitor {has (does not have)} a mood disorder. Its reasoning:
      {Reasons given by Angel.R}
      2. The agent who retrieved past cases but did not analyze them believes the visitor {has (does not have)} a mood disorder.
      Their reasoning: {Reasons given by Angel.D}
      3. The agent who retrieved and analyzed past cases believes the visitor {has (does not have)} a mood disorder. Their
      reasoning: {Reasons given by Angel.C}
      Original Case Information:
      1. Visitor’s Medical Record: {The visitor’s medical record in Step 3}
      2. Visitor’s Scale Performances: {The visitor’s performances on selected scales}
      3. Reference from Past Medical Records: {Top-5 similar medical records with analysis}
      4. Reference from Past Scale Performances: {Top-5 similar scale performances with analysis}
      Constraints:
      1. Stick to your stance. Every case presented for discussion is inherently controversial, meaning your viewpoint is strongly
      justified.
      2. You cannot interact with physical objects. If an action is absolutely necessary, request the user to perform it. If the user refuses
      and no alternative exists, terminate the process to avoid wasting time and effort.
      Resources:
      1. You are a large language model trained on extensive textual data, including factual medical knowledge.
      2. All relevant visitor information is provided. Make full use of it.
      Best Practices:
      1. Consider all available visitor information (medical records & scale performances). Examine both similar medical records and
      similar scale performances as references. Do not base conclusions on a single source.
      2. Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis, do not overly rely on similar case diagnoses.
      3. Self-reported questionnaire results may contradict clinician evaluations. In such cases, prioritize the clinician’s assessment.
      Terms like "occasionally," "sometimes," and "frequently" in self-reports are subjective and may lead to misinterpretation of the
      visitor’s condition.
      4. Only symptoms related to mood disorders should influence your diagnosis. The visitor may have other mental disorders that
      are not classified as mood disorders.
      5. Mood disorders include only depression and bipolar disorder, characterized by depressive or manic symptoms.
      Response Format:
      Generate a JSON string in the following format. Do not include any extra text or explanation.
      {"response": "Your reasoning for why the visitor has (or does not have) a mood disorder, along with a rebuttal to the opposing
      argument.", "thoughts": {"plan": "Briefly outline short-term and long-term plans", "criticism": "Constructive self-criticism"}}




C.4.1     Debate Details
Our debate stage is intentionally designed to simulate the classical four-stage structure commonly
used in formal debates, with a minimum of 2 rounds and a maximum of 4. At the beginning of each
round, the prompt guides the Pro and Con agents through a structured process:

        • Round 1 – Opening Statements: Both Pro and Con agents present their initial diagnostic
          positions based on the available information.
        • Round 2 – Rebuttals: Each agent critically responds to the opponent’s arguments, defending
          their own stance and challenging the other side’s reasoning.
        • Round 3 – Free Debate (Optional): If the Judge Agent identifies unresolved or ambiguous
          points after the first two rounds, it initiates a more open-ended exchange to further clarify
          conflicting perspectives.
        • Round 4 – Closing Statements (Optional): If the discussion remains inconclusive or highly
          contentious, both agents are given one final opportunity to summarize their most compelling
          arguments in a concise manner.

After each round, the Judge Agent evaluates whether the debate should continue, provides reasoning,
and reflects on the arguments. At the end of the debate, the judge delivers a diagnosis with reasons.
The example in Figure 6 demonstrates a case where the debate concluded in three rounds.
This flexible structure allows the system to adapt the level of deliberation to the complexity of the
case, balancing efficiency with thoroughness in clinical decision-making. The minimum of two
rounds ensures that both sides have the opportunity to present and respond to each other’s views—this


                                                                       35
                      The client has a mood disorder.
                      • The client shows mood instability with shifts from depression to (hypo)mania, consistent with bipolar disorder.
                      • Past hospitalization for mood disorder and long-term use of mood stabilizers support this.
         Angel.R      • Symptoms like irritability, increased activity, and energy align with hypomanic episodes per DSM-5.

                      The client has a mood disorder.
                      • The client exhibits emotional instability, including hallucinations and inappropriate laughter.
                      • Despite clinician-rated scales showing no depression, self-reports suggest moderate depression.
         Angel.D      • Similar cases were diagnosed as bipolar or major depression, reinforcing this possibility.

                      The client doesn't have a mood disorder.
                      • Though the client self-reports mild depressive and anxiety symptoms, clinician ratings show no signs of
                         depression, anxiety, or insomnia.
         Angel.C      • Mood fluctuation history is noted, but current assessments do not support an active mood disorder diagnosis.
                      • For hallucinations and inappropriate laughter, consider the client having schizophrenia.



                                                                         Round 1
                                              Both sides should claim the diagnosis and reasons in this round.

         I believe this client has a mood disorder.
         • The client's records show long-term mood fluctuations, ranging from depressive to elevated states, which is characteristic of
             bipolar disorder.
         • The client was previously hospitalized for a mood disorder and has been on mood-related medication, indicating a strong link
             to mood disorder symptoms.
         • Although clinician-rated assessments did not indicate significant depression or anxiety, the client's self-report showed
             moderate depression, which may better reflect their subjective emotional state.

         I don't think this client has a mood disorder.
         • Clinician-rated assessments show no signs of depression, anxiety, or suicidal tendencies—key indicators of mood disorders.
         • Although the client initially improved with mood-related medication, new symptoms appeared despite continued medication
             use, suggesting a possible different mental condition.
         • Similar cases have inconsistent diagnoses, so relying solely on past hospitalization records is insufficient for a conclusive
             diagnosis.


                                                                Rebuttals missing. Continue.




                                                                      Round 2
                                                      Both sides should refute the opposite side.

         •   Self-reported symptoms indicate depression and suicidality, with a PHQ-9 score of 19 and daily suicidal ideation. These are
             core indicators of mood disorders, even if clinician-rated scales show minimal symptoms.
         •   New symptoms during continuous medication do not rule out mood disorders. Mood disorders often present episodically or
             with partial response to treatment.
         •   Historical diagnosis and treatment response support a mood disorder. The client was previously hospitalized for an affective
             disorder and showed improvement with mood stabilizers.


         •   Mood fluctuations alone do not confirm a mood disorder. The observed shifts could be part of other psychiatric conditions
             such as borderline personality traits or stress-induced responses. Symptom variability requires a broader differential diagnosis.
         •   Past hospitalization and medication use do not confirm the current diagnosis. Historical treatment for a mood-related
             condition is not definitive evidence of a present mood disorder, especially when recent clinician-rated assessments show no
             active depressive or anxious symptoms.
         •   Self-report scores must be interpreted cautiously. While PHQ-9 indicates moderate depression, clinician-administered scales
             (HAMD, HAMA, BPRS) consistently show no depressive, anxious, or suicidal signs. Clinical observation remains the gold
             standard.


                                                     Certain points are not discussed. Continue.



                                                                       Round 3
                Please discuss the possibility of a performance conflict between self-report and clinician assessment, in one sentence.

          The client's symptoms are suppressed by medicine.


         The client may have schizophrenia.



                                                        All symptoms discussed. Debate ends.

          The client doesn't have a mood disorder.
          Although the client was previously hospitalized and prescribed medication related to mood disorders, multiple clinician-
          administered scales did not indicate typical symptoms of depression or anxiety. Moreover, the client's current symptoms are not
          alleviated by mood disorder medications, raising the possibility of other psychiatric conditions with overlapping features, such as
          schizophrenia.



Figure 6: A debate example where only Angel.C was correct and the other two were wrong, and the
Judge made a correct decision by debate.


                                                                        36
                                               Table 13: Prompts of the Judge.
     Role:
     You are a psychiatry diagnosis expert acting as the judge in this consultation. Your role is to determine whether each debate
     round should conclude and make the final diagnosis.
     Visitor Information:
     This is a challenging case, and three agents have already provided their diagnoses:
     Agent without prior case retrieval believes the visitor {is/isn’t, diagnosis by Angel.R} diagnosed with a mood disorder. Their
     reasoning: {Reasons given by Angel.R}
     Agent who retrieved past cases but did not analyze them believes the visitor {is/isn’t, diagnosis by Angel.D} diagnosed with a
     mood disorder. Their reasoning: {Reasons given by Angel.D}
     Agent who retrieved and analyzed past cases believes the visitor {is/isn’t, diagnosis by Angel.C} diagnosed with a mood disorder.
     Their reasoning: {Reasons given by Angel.C}
     Original Case Information:
     Visitor’s Medical Record: {The visitor’s medical record in Step 3}
     Visitor’s Scale Performances: {The visitor’s performances on selected scales}
     Reference from Past Medical Records: {Top-5 similar medical records with analysis}
     Reference from Past Scale Performances: {Top-5 similar scale performances with analysis}
     Constraints:
     Fulfill your role as a judge and base your decision solely on the arguments presented by both sides.
     You cannot interact with physical objects. If an action is absolutely necessary to complete the task, request the user to perform it.
     If the user refuses and no alternative exists, terminate the process to avoid wasting time and effort.
     Resources:
     You are a large language model trained on extensive textual data, including factual medical knowledge.
     All relevant visitor information is provided. Make full use of it.
     Best Practices:
     Consider all available visitor information (medical records & scale performances). Examine both similar medical records and
     similar scale performances as references. Do not base conclusions on a single source.
     Due to the personalized nature of psychiatric diagnosis, do not overly rely on similar case diagnoses.
     Self-reported questionnaire results may contradict clinician evaluations. In such cases, prioritize the clinician’s assessment. Terms
     like "occasionally," "sometimes," and "frequently" in self-reports are subjective and may lead to misinterpretation of the visitor’s
     condition.
     Only symptoms related to mood disorders should influence your diagnosis. The visitor may have other mental disorders that are
     not classified as mood disorders.
     Mood disorders include only depression and bipolar disorder, characterized by depressive or manic symptoms.
     Response Format:
     Generate a JSON string in the following format. Do not include any extra text or explanation.
     {"judge": "Do you believe the debate should end? Answer only ’yes’ or ’no’.", "diagnose": "Do you believe the visitor has a
     mood disorder? Answer only ’yes’ or ’no’.", "thoughts": { "plan": "Briefly outline short-term and long-term plans.", "criticism":
     "Constructive self-criticism.", "judge_reasons": "Your reasoning for why the debate should or should not end.", "reasoning":
     "Your reasoning for whether the visitor does or does not have a mood disorder." }}




establishes a meaningful diagnostic exchange. If the Judge Agent determines that all relevant points
have been sufficiently addressed by the end of Round 2, the debate can be concluded early. However,
when the case involves ambiguity or conflicting symptom interpretations, the Judge may trigger
additional rounds to promote deeper reasoning.
In practice, we found most cases concluded after just two rounds of debate, as the key diagnostic
arguments had already been clearly presented and addressed. The remaining cases required only one
additional round, with all debates concluding within three rounds. This observation supports the
efficiency of our debate framework in ensuring thorough reasoning when needed, while avoiding
unnecessary verbosity or repetition.


D    Synthetic Data

Usage Declaration. This work and its contents, including the synthetic mental health diagnostic
dataset and diagnostic agent, are provided for academic and research purposes only. None of
the material constitutes medical, clinical, or therapeutic advice. The synthetic data is artificially
generated and does not represent real patient information. No warranties, express or implied, are
offered regarding the accuracy, reliability, or suitability of the dataset, agent, or any related content.
The authors and contributors are not responsible for any errors, omissions, or consequences arising
from the use of this repository.
This is not a substitute for professional medical or psychological evaluation. Users should consult
qualified healthcare providers for clinical assessments or treatment decisions. By using this repository,
you acknowledge that the diagnostic agent is experimental and should not guide real-world medical
decisions.


                                                                     37
The use of the software, data, or any derived materials is entirely at the user’s own risk. By accessing
or utilizing this repository, you agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the authors, contributors,
and affiliated entities from any claims or damages.

D.1   Synthetic Data Construction

We synthesize our dataset using a structured pipeline that begins with data preparation, followed by
model training, and concludes with rigorous post-processing. First, we construct the input data by
combining 16 mood disorder-related questions from Table 7, 8 baseline assessment scale total scores,
and binary mood disorder labels (1 for presence, 0 for absence), resulting in 25 features per case. This
tabular format serves as the foundation for our synthesis process using the TabSyn framework [20].
The training phase consists of two key components. We first pretrain a VAE to encode the tabular
data into a continuous latent space, employing column-wise tokenizers and Transformer-based
encoders/decoders to handle mixed data types. The model optimizes an adaptively weighted ELBO
loss, dynamically balancing reconstruction accuracy against KL divergence regularization to preserve
inter-column dependencies. Subsequently, we train a diffusion model in this latent space, where the
forward process gradually adds Gaussian noise following a linear schedule, while the reverse process
learns to denoise samples through a score-based SDE.
Our synthetic data generation initially follows a 1:1 ratio with the original dataset’s predefined splits
(for both retrieval and test sets). The generation process involves iterative denoising of Gaussian
priors to produce latent vectors, which are decoded into tabular form using the VAE’s detokenizer,
applying linear inverse transformations for numerical features and Softmax sampling for categorical
variables. Through rigorous post-processing, including value rounding, logical consistency checks
(e.g., ensuring question-level sums never exceed scale totals), and illogical case removal.
An example of our synthetic data is shown below.
      {
          " HAMA Q4 Score " : 3 ,
          " HAMA Q6 Score " : 3 ,
          " HAMA Total Score " : 28 ,
          " GAD7 Total Score " : 18 ,
          " PHQ9 Q1 Score " : 3 ,
          " PHQ9 Q2 Score " : 2 ,
          " PHQ9 Q4 Score " : 2 ,
          " PHQ9 Q9 Score " : 0 ,
          " PHQ9 Total Score " : 14 ,
          " HAMD Q1 Score " : 2 ,
          " HAMD Q3 Score " : 1 ,
          " HAMD Q4 Score " : 1 ,
          " HAMD Q7 Score " : 2 ,
          " HAMD Q22 Score " : 1 ,
          " HAMD Total Score " : 28 ,
          " BPRS Q9 Score " : 3 ,
          " PSQI Total Score " : 11 ,
          " SHAPS Total Score " : 29 ,
          " HCL32 Total Score " : 18 ,
          " DAS Total Score " : 122 ,
          " SSRS Total Score " : 40 ,
          " MDQ Total Score " : 11 ,
          " BPRS Total Score " : 34 ,
          " YMRS Total Score " : 5 ,
          " Mood Disorder " : 1
      }




D.2   Synthetic Data Evaluation

Building on the evaluation framework of Zhang et al. [20], we conduct a comprehensive evaluation
of our synthetic data across five critical dimensions: statistical density, data quality, machine learning
efficacy, privacy preservation, and logistic detectability. The results demonstrate that our synthetic
dataset achieves exceptional fidelity, accurately reproducing both the core statistical patterns and
complex relationships present in the original data while maintaining strong utility for machine
learning applications. Notably, our evaluation shows the synthetic data achieves: (1) high-density
preservation of univariate and multivariate distributions, (2) robust performance in downstream ML
tasks, and (3) near-indistinguishability from real data according to rigorous detection tests. These
collective findings position our synthetic data as a reliable surrogate for the original dataset across
analytical and modeling use cases.


                                                   38
D.2.1     Density Evaluation

The quality of synthetic data hinges on its ability to accurately replicate both individual feature
distributions and the complex relationships between variables in real-world data. The metrics, derived
from Shape, Trend, Coverage, and overall Density score, collectively measure the fidelity and utility
of synthetic data for downstream applications.
Our synthetic dataset demonstrates remarkable fidelity in this regard, achieving an excellent overall
density score of 0.86, well above the 0.8 threshold considered indicative of high-quality synthetic
data. The component scores reveal particularly strong performance in capturing feature relationships,
with Column Pair Trends reaching 0.93, while maintaining solid 0.79 fidelity in individual Column
Shapes. These results demonstrate that our synthesis process successfully preserves the nuanced
statistical patterns of the original data, with especially robust preservation of the critical multivariate
relationships that are often most challenging to replicate.
Metric descriptions and our detailed scores are illustrated in the following parts.
Shape (Column Distribution Shape). The Shape metric evaluates how well synthetic data replicates
individual feature distributions from the real data using two complementary measures: KSCom-
plement compares cumulative distribution functions to assess overall shape alignment (including
normality and skewness), while TVComplement evaluates precise probability mass matching for
categorical data. Higher scores (closer to 1.0) indicate better preservation of the original data’s
statistical properties. As shown in Table 14, our synthetic data demonstrates strong distributional
fidelity across all columns.


Table 14: Score of column distribution. KS is short for Kolmogorov-Smirnov complement; TV is
short for Total Variation complement.
        Column        0          1           2           3           4           5           6           7           8           9          10          11          12
        Metric      KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS
        Score       0.76        0.74        0.68        0.79        0.79        0.84        0.81        0.85        0.72        0.77        0.80        0.80        0.78
    Column       13         14          15          16          17          18          19          20          21          22          23          24         Average
    Metric       KS        KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          KS          TV                 \
    Score        0.82      0.67        0.78        0.88        0.80        0.90        0.84        0.87        0.90        0.67        0.83        0.73             0.79


Trend (Column Pair Trends). This metric evaluates how faithfully synthetic data reproduces
the statistical relationships between variables. For numerical features (0-23), we assess linear
and nonlinear correlations (CorrelationSimilarity), examining whether directional patterns (e.g.,
positive/negative associations) are preserved. For categorical feature 24, we measure dependency
preservation through joint probability distributions (ContingencySimilarity). High scores (closer to
1.0) indicate the synthetic data successfully maintains the original data’s multivariate patterns, as
demonstrated in Figure 7.
Coverage. The Coverage metric evaluates how comprehensively synthetic data captures the full
spectrum of variability in real data. For numerical features, RangeCoverage assesses whether extreme
values and distribution tails are properly reproduced, while CategoryCoverage verifies the faithful
representation of categorical frequencies and combinations. High scores (closer to 1.0) indicate the
synthetic data successfully encompasses the complete range of real-world scenarios present in the
original dataset, as shown in Table 15.


Table 15: Score of column distribution. RC is short for RangeCoverage; CC is short for CategoryCov-
erage.
        Column        0          1           2           3           4           5           6           7           8           9          10          11          12
        Metric      RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC
        Score       1.00        1.00        0.98        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        0.96        0.75        1.00        1.00        0.75
           Column          13          14          15          16          17          18          19          20          21          22          23          24
           Metric         RC         RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          RC          CC
           Score          1.00       0.78        0.83        0.95        0.95        0.94        0.98        1.00        0.86        0.90        0.90        1.00



                                                                                  39
                                                                                                             6 F R U H  R I  3 D L U  7 U H Q G V  E H W Z H H Q  ' L I I H U H Q W  & R O X P Q V
                                                                                                                                                                     
           
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                 
           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                      

                  7 U H Q G  6 F R U H
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I H D W X U H V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                     I H D W X U H V

Figure 7: Column pair trend similarity scores. Features 0–23 are evaluated using CorrelationSimilarity,
while feature 24 is assessed with ContingencySimilarity.


Density (Overall Data Fidelity) The Density score provides a comprehensive evaluation of synthetic
data quality by combining distributional accuracy (Shape) and relational preservation (Trend) into a
unified metric. Calculated as the harmonic mean of these components, our synthetic data scored 0.86,
demonstrating exceptional statistical alignment with the source data, not only maintaining faithful
individual feature distributions but also accurately reproducing the complex web of relationships
between variables.

D.2.2   Quality Evaluation
Automatic Evaluation We evaluate synthetic data fidelity using the Alpha-Precision metric, which
assesses two critical dimensions of data quality:
Pattern Accuracy (α=0.72): Measures how precisely the synthetic data reproduces the core statistical
patterns of real data, ensuring generated samples are realistic and representative.
Diversity Coverage (β=0.44): Evaluates the synthetic data’s ability to capture the full variability of
real-world scenarios, including less frequent but important edge cases.
These results indicate our synthetic data successfully captures the main data distribution (α) while
showing room for improvement in representing rare cases (β). The strong α-score suggests ex-
cellent utility for applications requiring faithful pattern reproduction, while the β-score highlights
opportunities to enhance coverage of the data manifold’s full extent.
Clincian Audit We randomly sampled 50 cases (25 real and 25 synthetic) and asked three licensed
clinicians to distinguish between them. Their classification accuracy was as follows:


                                                                                     Table 16: Human Evaluation of MoodSyn.
        Clinician                                         Correct Real                          Real Misclassified                                            Correct Synthetic                                     Synthetic Misclassified
            1                                                 18                                       7                                                             20                                                       5
            2                                                 21                                       4                                                             22                                                       3
            3                                                 19                                       6                                                             18                                                       7

The three clinicians achieved accuracy rates of 0.80, 0.82, and 0.72 when classifying synthetic data
as real, demonstrating the synthetic data’s convincing resemblance to real clinical data. We measured


                                                                                                                                                40
inter-annotator agreement using Fleiss’ Kappa, which showed moderate agreement among raters (κ =
0.54).

D.2.3   Machine Learning Efficiency Evaluation
This evaluation assesses the practical utility of synthetic data by measuring how effectively it can train
machine learning models to perform real-world classification tasks. We employ a comprehensive set
of metrics to evaluate model performance when trained on synthetic data and tested on real data: the
F1 score (both standard and weighted) evaluates the balance between precision and recall, AUROC
measures the model’s discriminative ability across all classification thresholds, and accuracy assesses
overall prediction correctness.
As shown in Table 17, the results demonstrate our synthetic data’s strong capability to train performant
models, with consistently high scores across all metrics indicating successful knowledge transfer
from synthetic to real data scenarios. These findings validate that models trained on our synthetic
data can effectively generalize to real-world applications while maintaining robust classification
performance.

        Table 17: Machine Learning Efficiency (MLE) evaluation using XGBoost classifier.
                         Metric          binary f1    roc auc   weighted f1   accuracy
                      best f1 scores        0.884     0.9767      0.9037       0.9247
                  best weighted scores     0.884      0.9767      0.9037       0.9247
                    best auroc scores      0.8852     0.9735      0.9044       0.9247
                     best acc scores       0.884      0.9767      0.9037       0.9247
                     best avg scores       0.884      0.9767      0.9037       0.9247


D.2.4   Privacy Evaluation
We evaluate privacy protection using the Distance to Closest Record (DCR) metric by first prepro-
cessing data: numerical features are normalized by their range, and categorical features are one-hot
encoded to standardize feature scales for consistent distance calculations. For each synthetic record,
the L1 distance (sum of absolute differences) to all real records and all test records is computed,
and the minimum distance for each synthetic record in both groups is identified. The DCR score is
then calculated as the proportion of synthetic records where the closest real record is closer than the
closest test record. A score approaching 0.5 indicates that synthetic data is equidistant to real and
test datasets on average, suggesting stronger privacy protection by reducing the risk of re-identifying
specific real individuals from the synthetic data.
Given that the real data has been desensitized, although we scored 0.87 for the synthetic data, it doesn’t
have the potential for privacy leaking. The synthetic data effectively preserves the distributional
characteristics of the desensitized real data, such as the value ranges of numerical features and the
probability distributions of categorical features. This is advantageous for data applications like
model training, as it indicates that the synthetic data has strong "realism" or the ability to mimic the
desensitized real data closely. This alignment ensures that the synthetic data retains the statistical
utility of the original dataset while avoiding privacy risks associated with identifiable information,
making it a valuable substitute for downstream analytical tasks.

D.2.5   Logistic Detection Evaluation
The Logistic Detection metric evaluates how well synthetic data mimics real data by measuring its
distinguishability. A perfect synthetic dataset should be virtually indistinguishable from real data.
Our synthetic data achieved an excellent score of 0.53, very close to the ideal 0.5 (random guessing).
This demonstrates that our synthetic data maintains high fidelity to the statistical properties of real
data, making it highly suitable for downstream applications where data realism is crucial.




                                                     41
E     Experiment
E.1   Experimental Settings

Baseline Prompts. For prompts in bare LLMs, we employ the key element combination format
derived from medical records (Step 3 in Figure 3) along with the overall performance metrics (total
score and corresponding descriptions) of each available scale. It is important to note that some
scales do not rely on a total score to assess performance; instead, they use individual questions or
specific question combinations to evaluate a particular dimension (e.g., CTQ scale and MCCB tests).
Additionally, certain scales include not only multiple-choice questions but also open-ended questions,
making it impossible to calculate a total score (e.g., NSSI scale). However, since several scales closely
related to mood disorders utilize a fully multiple-choice format with a total score calculation, the
information provided to the baselines remains comprehensive. A prompt template with an example is
shown in Figure 8.

                                                      Baseline Prompt Template
       Based on the following information, assess whether the client may have a mood disorder, which includes depression and bipolar
       disorder, characterized by depressive or manic symptoms. Please provide a detailed analysis in JSON format:
       {"Diagnosis": yes or no, "Reasons": summarize and explain each point}
       The client's medical record is as follows:
       {Medical Record (the format in Step 3)}
       The client's scale test results are as follows:
       - Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale (DAS): 159/280, indicating cognitive distortions in his views of people and situations.
       - Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7): 2/21, indicating no anxiety symptoms.
       - Hypomania Checklist (HCL-32): 11/32, indicating no hypomanic symptoms.
       - Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ): 7/13, suggesting possible bipolar disorder.
       - Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9): 13/27, suggesting moderate depression.
       - Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS): 40/56, indicating anhedonia.
       - Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS): 24/126, indicating no psychotic symptoms.
       - Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAMA): 3/56, indicating no anxiety.
       - Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD): 5/76, indicating no depressive symptoms.
       - Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS): 11/60, indicating mild manic symptoms.


                                      Figure 8: An example of baseline prompt.

Retrieval number. Table 18 evaluates how retrieval number k affects model performance, and k = 5
yields the optimal balance across evaluation metrics. Note that the optimal value of k may vary across
datasets and should be adjusted accordingly when using the MoodAngels diagnostic framework.

                           Table 18: Performances with different retrieval numbers.
                                                   Setting               ACC        MCC
                                                 Angel.Dk=5              0.923      0.837
                                                 Angel.Dk=3              0.906      0.794
                                                 Angel.Dk=1              0.923      0.733
                                                 Angel.R(k=0)            0.920      0.829




                                                                    42
E.2     Experimental Results

E.2.1     Human Evaluation of Generated Reasons
The debate agents generate reasons for their position by points. We evaluated their performances by
three licensed psychiatry experts on our co-author clinician’s team. Metrics are clinical coherence
(0-2 points), information completeness (0-2 points), and clarity of expression (0-2 points), as detailed
in Table 19. The assessment results are shown in Table 20.

                                Table 19: Evaluation criteria of generated reasons.
 Clinical Coherence: whether reasoning aligns with clinical logic and evidence.
 2 = Fully coherent and professionally sound;
 1 = Minor logical flaws;
 0 = Major errors or conflicts.
 Information Completeness: inclusion of key diagnostic elements (e.g., symptoms, scales, course, exclusions,
 impairment).
 2 = Comprehensive and sufficient;
 1 = Missing important elements;
 0 = Lacks key diagnostic info.
 Clarity and Expression: clarity and professionalism of the explanation.
 2 = Clear and professionally worded;
 1 = Some ambiguity or terminology misuse;
 0 = Unclear or confusing.



                                Table 20: Evaluation results of generated reasons.
      Model       coh1   com1    clarity1   coh2   com2   clarity2   coh3   com3    clarity3   avg_coh   avg_com   avg_clarity
     GPT-4o       0.5    0.9       0.7      0.2    0.5      0.9       0.6    1        1.1         0.43     0.5         0.9
    Angel.R       0.9    1.1       0.9      0.6    0.7      1.2        1    1.3       1.3         0.87    1.03        1.17
    Angel.D       0.8    1.2       0.9      0.6    0.6       1        0.9   1.3       1.2         0.83    1.03        0.73
    Angel.C       0.9    1.2        1       0.7    0.8      1.1       1.1   1.4       1.3         1.27     1.4        1.13
   multi-Angels   1.1    1.3       1.1      0.8    0.8      1.1       1.1   1.1       1.1         1.3     1.3         1.1



We report Fleiss’ Kappa as the measure of inter-annotator agreement (IAA), and the results are
shown in Table 21. The results demonstrate the high quality of our generated outputs. The higher
inter-annotator agreement suggests that the outputs of our multi-agent system are more consistent,
clinically aligned, and better recognized by experts.

                                 Table 21: Evaluation IAA of generated reasons.
                                   Model            coherence        completeness       clarity
                                   GPT-4o              0.6              0.26             0.13
                                  Angel.R             0.55              0.37             0.19
                                  Angel.D             0.69              0.28             0.25
                                  Angel.C             0.69              0.33             0.27
                                 multi-Angels         0.67              0.45             0.54




                                                              43
E.2.2    Subgroup Performance Analysis
We evaluate the performance of Angel.R across demographic subgroups on the patient subset,
containing 190 cases of mood disorder and 56 cases of other diseases. The performances are shown
in Table 22.
For gender subgroups, despite a nominal accuracy difference (∆ = 0.088), the p-value (0.083 > 0.05)
and a comparable MCC difference (∆ = 0.018) suggest no statistically significant gender bias. The
slightly higher female accuracy likely reflects dataset characteristics rather than model bias.
For age subgroups, no significant accuracy difference (p=0.110) is observed between adults and
children, with MCC values differing by only 0.048. It indicates that our model generalizes well
across age groups without age-specific calibration.

                                 Table 22: Subgroup Performances.
                                       Group       ACC MCC
                                     All Patients 0.845 0.489
                                          Gender Subgroups
                                        Male       0.784 0.466
                                       Female      0.872 0.484
                                            Age Subgroups
                                        Adult      0.795 0.500
                                       Female      0.873 0.452


E.3     Ablation Study

In this ablation study, we evaluate the robustness of our framework by changing input order and
temperature.
Input Order Sensitivity. We use the random.shuffle() function to randomize the input order
during the debate stage, and the results are shown in Table 23.

                         Table 23: Performances with different input orders.
                                       Setting                ACC      MCC
                             multi-Angels (ordered input)     0.925    0.834
                             multi-Angels (shuffled input)    0.927    0.838

Temperature Sensitivity. We vary the temperature of GPT-4o to assess the output stability of
Angel.R, and the results are shown in Table 24.

                     Table 24: Performances with different LLM temperatures.
                                       Setting               ACC      MCC
                                Angel.Rtemp=1 (default)      0.920    0.829
                                  Angel.Rtemp=0.7            0.922    0.836
                                  Angel.Rtemp=0.3            0.923    0.836
                                   Angel.Rtemp=0             0.911    0.808

These results indicate that variations in input order and temperature have minimal impact on diagnostic
performance, demonstrating the stability and robustness of our framework.




                                                   44
E.4     Case Study

For the inter-scale conflict and borderline cases, we selected two representative scale-only cases.
The scale performance data are derived from real cases at our corporate hospital. These cases are
illustrated in Figure 9 and Figure 10.
For the overlapping symptoms cases presented in this paper, which include medical records, we have
anonymized all event details while retaining the patient’s actual symptoms. The case is depicted in
Figure 11. In our experiments, we exclusively used fully anonymized real-world cases to evaluate
MoodAngels’ diagnostic capabilities in practical application scenarios.

               A Case with Inter-Scale Conflicts                          A Case with Borderline Performances
         [clinician-evaluated]               [self-reported]           [clinician-evaluated]               [self-reported]
      Depression-related Performances: (conflicts)                  Depression-related Performances:

        "hamd_total_score": 2         "phq9_total_score": 11         "hamd_total_score": 10          "phq9_total_score": 6
          "hama_Q6_score": 0            "phq9_Q2_score": 2             "hama_Q6_score": 1              "phq9_Q2_score": 1
           "bprs_Q9_score": 1                                            "bprs_Q9_score": 1
          "hamd_Q1_score": 0                                           "hamd_Q1_score": 1



      No depressed mood observed.      Moderate depression.                             Mild depression.

                                                                    Suicide-related Performances:
      Suicide-related Performances: (consistent)
                                                                       "hamd_Q3_score": 0              "phq9_Q9_score": 0
          "hamd_Q3_score": 0            "phq9_Q9_score": 0

                                                                                      No suicide tendency.
                         No suicide tendency.
                                                                    Energy&Interest-related Performances:
      Energy&Interest-related Performances: (mild conflicts)

          "hamd_Q7_score": 0                                            "hamd_Q7_score": 0             "phq9_Q4_score": 1
                                        "phq9_Q4_score": 1

         "hamd_Q22_score": 0             "phq9_Q1_score": 1            "hamd_Q22_score": 1             "phq9_Q1_score": 1



          No interest decline.        Mild interest decline.                          Mild interest decline.


       Anxiety-related Performances: (consistent)                   Anxiety-related Performances:

         "hama_total_score": 7         "gad7_total_score": 6           "hama_total_score": 3         "gad7_total_score": 7


                             Mild anxiety.                                                 Mild anxiety.

       Insomnia-related Performances: (consistent)                   Insomnia-related Performances:

           "hamd_Q4_score": 0                                           "hamd_Q4_score": 2

           "hama_Q4_score": 0                                           "hama_Q4_score": 1


              No insomnia.                                                Mild insomnia.


Figure 9: A case with inter-scale conflicts, with Figure 10: A case with borderline performances,
only scale performances provided. In this case, with only scale performances provided. In this
the client doesn’t have any mental diseases.      case, the client doesn’t have any mental diseases.




                                                               45
                             Scale Performances                                                          Medical Record
               [clinician-evaluated]                 [self-reported]             The client is an 18-year-old female student.
                                                                                 Chief Complaint: Abnormal behavior and speech for over 4
            Depression-related Performances: (Conflicts)                         months, worsening in the past week.
                                                                                 History of Present Illness: Approximately 3 months ago, the
                                              "phq9_total_score": 17             patient experienced a car accident and began exhibiting low
              "hamd_total_score": 5
                                                                                 mood, reduced motivation, and a lack of interest in daily
               "hama_Q6_score": 0                   "phq9_Q2_score": 2           activities. She reported persistent feelings of sadness, a sense of
                                                                                 life being meaningless, and passive thoughts about not
                "bprs_Q9_score": 1
                                                                                 wanting to live (without any actual attempts). She occasionally
               "hamd_Q1_score": 0                                                expressed worries about her future and described ongoing
                                                                                 cognitive confusion. The patient sometimes referring to a family
                                                                                 member in an unconventional way and identifying a childhood
                                                                                 acquaintance as a romantic partner. She also described feelings of
                 No depression.                Moderate depression.
                                                                                 being watched and had installed a surveillance device at home.
                                                                                 At times, she was observed talking and laughing to herself. Her
                                                                                 appetite decreased, and she expressed a desire to lose weight
                                                                                 despite being of normal build. She was previously evaluated at a
           Suicide-related Performances: (Conflicts)                             local hospital, where she was diagnosed with a psychiatric
                                                                                 condition and prescribed medication. After some improvement,
               "hamd_Q3_score": 0                "phq9_Q9_score": 2
                                                                                 she discontinued the medication on her own. Over the past week,
                                                                                 her symptoms have recurred, prompting her family to seek
                                                                                 further evaluation and treatment at our facility. Since the onset of
              No suicide tendency.             Suicide tendency in
                                                                                 symptoms, the patient has maintained adequate energy levels,
                                                  half of days.
                                                                                 normal sleep patterns, and regular bowel and bladder habits.
                                                                                 She has experienced some weight loss.

           Energy&Interest-related Performances: (Conflicts)                                    Symptom Matching in DSM-5
               "hamd_Q7_score": 0                "phq9_Q4_score": 2             { "Symptom": "Significant changes in personality and behavior,
              "hamd_Q22_score": 0                "phq9_Q1_score": 2             accompanied by decline in language abilities and memory
                                                                                impairment, commonly seen in younger patients.",
                                                                                "Disease": "Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder", "Category":
                                                                                "Neurocognitive Disorders", "Relevance": 0.6484 },
               No interest decline.           Interest declines in half
                                                      of days.                  { "Symptom": "Symptoms first appeared before the age of 10 and
                                                                                cannot be explained by other mental disorders (such as autism, post-
                                                                                traumatic stress disorder, etc.) or substance abuse.",
                                                                                "Disease": "Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder", "Category":
            Anxiety-related Performances:                                       "Mood Disorders" , "Relevance": 0.626 },

              "hama_total_score": 0            "gad7_total_score": 4            { "Symptom": "Extreme sensitivity to social situations, avoidance
                                                                                of social activities, feelings of inferiority, and excessive worry
                                                                                about negative evaluation.",
                                      No anxiety.                               "Disease": "Avoidant Personality Disorder", "Category":
                                                                                "Personality Disorders", "Relevance": 0.6196 },

                                                                                { "Symptom": "Hypomanic episode: Lasting at least 4 days,
                                                                                characterized by abnormally elevated or irritable m oo d,
             Insomnia-related Performances:                                     accompanied by increased energy or activity.",
                                                                                "Disease": "Bipolar Disorder", "Category": "Mood Disorders" ,
                "hamd_Q4_score": 0                                              "Relevance": 0.6143 },
                "hama_Q4_score": 0
                                                                                { "Symptom": "Decline in cognitive abilities, closely related to the
                                                                                neuropathological effects of HIV infection, often accompanied by
                                                                                behavioral and emotional disturbances.",
                   No insomnia.                                                 "Disease": "Neurocognitive Disorder Due to HIV Infection",
                                                                                "Category": "Neurocognitive Disorders", "Relevance": 0.6094 }



                                                                       Top-5 Related Cases
           Patient Symptoms: Emotional instability, social impairment, negative behaviors, hallucinations, delusions.
           Diagnosis: The patient has a mood disorder, specifically Bipolar I Disorder, currently presenting with depressive episodes and mixed
           features.
           Similarity to Query: 0.8276

           Patient Symptoms: Low mood, negative thoughts, palpitations, irritability, and aggressive tendencies.
           Diagnosis: The patient has a mood disorder, specifically Major Depressive Disorder with psychotic features.
           Similarity to Query: 0.8228

           Patient Symptoms: Emotional instability, anxiety and irritability, physical discomfort, social impairment.
           Diagnosis: The patient has a mood disorder, specifically Major Depressive Disorder with anxious distress.
           Similarity to Query: 0.822

           Patient Symptoms: Low mood, self-harm tendencies, appetite and sleep disturbances.
           Diagnosis: The patient has a mood disorder, specifically Bipolar II Disorder, currently experiencing a major depressive episode.
           Similarity to Query: 0.8203

           Patient Symptoms: Emotional instability, loss of interest, hypersensitivity, auditory hallucinations, physical discomfort.
           Diagnosis: The patient does not have a mood disorder; the diagnosis is Schizophrenia, first acute episode.
           Similarity to Query: 0.8203



Figure 11: An adapted case with overlapping symptoms. The top-5 related cases are simplified for
intuitive presentations. In this case, the client has a delusional disorder on the schizophrenia spectrum
(not a mood disorder).



                                                                              46
