                                                    B ENCHMARKING C HINESE M EDICAL LLM S : A
                                             M ED B ENCH -BASED A NALYSIS OF P ERFORMANCE G APS AND
                                                     H IERARCHICAL O PTIMIZATION S TRATEGIES


                                                     Luyi Jiang1,2 , Jiayuan Chen3 , Lu Lu3 , Xinwei Peng3 , Lihao Liu3 , Junjun He3 , Jie Xu3 *




arXiv:2503.07306v1 [cs.CL] 10 Mar 2025
                                                     1
                                                     Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
                                              2
                                                Shanghai Health Development Research Center(Shanghai Medical Information Center), Shanghai, China
                                                                     3
                                                                       Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
                                                                             *Correspondence to: xujie@pjlab.org.cn




                                                                                             A BSTRACT
                                                  The evaluation and improvement of medical large language models (LLMs) are critical for their
                                                  real-world deployment, particularly in ensuring accuracy, safety, and ethical alignment. Existing
                                                  frameworks inadequately dissect domain-specific error patterns or address cross-modal challenges.
                                                  This study introduces a granular error taxonomy through systematic analysis of top 10 models on
                                                  MedBench, categorizing incorrect responses into eight types: Omissions, Hallucination, Format
                                                  Mismatch, Causal Reasoning Deficiency, Contextual Inconsistency, Unanswered, Output Error, and
                                                  Deficiency in Medical Language Generation. Evaluation of 10 leading models reveals vulnerabilities:
                                                  despite achieving 0.86 accuracy in medical knowledge recall, critical reasoning tasks show 96.3%
                                                  omission, while safety ethics evaluations expose alarming inconsistency (robustness score: 0.79)
                                                  under option shuffled. Our analysis uncovers systemic weaknesses in knowledge boundary enforce-
                                                  ment and multi-step reasoning. To address these, we propose a tiered optimization strategy spanning
                                                  four levels—from prompt engineering and knowledge-augmented retrieval to hybrid neuro-symbolic
                                                  architectures and causal reasoning frameworks. This work establishes an actionable roadmap for de-
                                                  veloping clinically robust LLMs while redefining evaluation paradigms through error-driven insights,
                                                  ultimately advancing the safety and trustworthiness of AI in high-stakes medical environments.

                                         Keywords Medical LLMs, MedBench, Incorrect Responses, Performance Optimization


                                         1    Introduction

                                         In recent years, large language models (LLMs), empowered by massive text corpora and deep learning techniques,
                                         have demonstrated breakthrough advancements in cross-domain knowledge transfer and human-machine dialogue
                                         interactions [1]. Within the healthcare domain, LLMs are increasingly deployed across nine core application scenarios,
                                         including intelligent diagnosis, personalized treatment, and drug discovery, garnering significant attention from both
                                         academia and industry [2, 3]. A particularly important area of focus is the development and evaluation of Chinese
                                         medical LLMs, which face unique challenges due to the specialized nature of medical knowledge and the high-stakes
                                         implications of clinical decision-making. Hence, ensuring the reliability and safety of these models has become critical,
                                         necessitating rigorous evaluation frameworks [4].
                                         Current research on medical LLMs evaluation exhibits two predominant trends. On one hand, general-domain
                                         benchmarks (e.g., HELM [5], MMLU [6]) assess foundational model capabilities through medical knowledge tests.
                                         On the other hand, specialized medical evaluation systems (e.g., MedQA [7], C-Eval-Medical [8]) emphasize clinical
                                         reasoning and ethical compliance. Notably, the MedBench framework [9], jointly developed by institutions including
                                         Shanghai AI Laboratory, has emerged as the most influential benchmark for Chinese medical LLMs. By establishing a
                                         standardized evaluation system spanning five dimensions—medical language comprehension, complex reasoning, and
                                         safety ethics—it has attracted participation from hundreds of research teams.
However, existing studies remain constrained by several critical limitations. First, most evaluations focus on macro-level
metrics (e.g., accuracy, F1-score) while lacking fine-grained error pattern analysis [10]. Second, conventional error
taxonomies (e.g., knowledge gaps, logical errors) fail to capture domain-specific deficiencies in medical contexts [11].
Third, standardized evaluation methodologies for cross-modal medical tasks (e.g., radiology report generation) remain
underdeveloped [12]. Furthermore, many legacy benchmarks struggle to differentiate the capabilities of state-of-the-art
models, diminishing their utility in guiding model optimization.
To address these challenges, this study leverages the MedBench database to propose an innovative analytical frame-
work incorporating eight error categories: Omissions, Hallucination, Format Mismatch, Causal Reasoning Deficiency,
Contextual Inconsistency, Unanswered, Output Error, and Deficiency in Medical Language Generation. Through
systematic analysis of error patterns across top-performing models, we reveal previously unidentified systemic weak-
nesses in Chinese medical LLMs, particularly in clinical pathway adherence and dialogue stability. This granular
error analysis not only provides actionable insights for model refinement but also establishes a novel evaluation
paradigm for developing safe and reliable medical AI systems. The MedBench platform is publicly accessible at
https://medbench.opencompass.org.cn.


2     Methods

2.1   Evaluation Framework and Metrics

To systematically assess the performance of LLMs in medical field, we adopted a multi-dimensional evaluation
framework under MedBench, encompassing objective multiple-choice questions (single- and multi-select) and subjective
open-domain questions. Accuracy and robustness were employed as core metrics for objective tasks, while key
information recall and hierarchical error taxonomy were utilized for subjective tasks (Table S1).

2.2   Objective Multiple-Choice Question Evaluation

For objective questions, model accuracy was calculated by directly matching LLM-generated options against ground-
truth answers. To rigorously validate robustness, answer choices for each multi-select question were shuffled across 5
permutations. A response was deemed valid only if the model consistently identified the correct answer(s) across all
permutations, ensuring resistance to positional bias.

2.3   Subjective Open-Domain Question Evaluation

Subjective responses were evaluated via macro-recall based on coverage of pre-defined key information points. Incorrect
responses were classified into eight categories through a three-expert consensus protocol: Omissions (failure to address
critical content), Hallucination (fabricated claims), Format Mismatch (deviation from structured guidelines), Causal
Inference Ability (flawed logical chains), Contextual Inconsistency (contradictory statements), Unanswered (no valid
output), Output Error (technical failures), and Deficiency in Medical Language Generation (non-clinical phrasing)
(Table 1).

                                 Table 1: Incorrect Responses Labels and Definitions

           Lable                           Define
           Omissions                       Model did not answer all points scored
           Hallucination                   Model responses are not realistic or do not exist in the question
                                           stem
           Format Mismatch                 Model does not output the content in the characteristic format as
                                           required or the output is in the wrong format
           Causal Reasoning Defi-          Over- or under-inference of the content of model responses
           ciency
           Contextual Inconsistency        Inconsistent or irrelevant model outputs
           Unanswered                      Model did not answer the question
           Output Error                    Model output is completely incorrect
           Deficiency in Medical Lan-      The model’s inability to translate everyday conversational content
           guage Generation                into clinically accurate medical text


                                                            2
3     Results

3.1   Core Competency Performance

From June to December 2024, standardized evaluations of the top 10 models across MedBench’s five competency
dimensions revealed distinct capability patterns. As shown in Table 2, models achieved peak accuracy (0.86) in
Medical Knowledge Question Answering, demonstrating robust comprehension of foundational concepts. Healthcare
Safety and Ethics emerged as a secondary strength (accuracy: 0.80), yet its robustness score (0.79) under shuffled
permutations highlighted persistent inconsistencies in ethical decision-making. Critical gaps persisted in Medical
Language Understanding (challenges in parsing specialized terminology) and Complex Medical Reasoning (limited
multi-step diagnostic inference).


                         Table 2: Accuracy and Robustness Performance of Top10 Models

          Dimension                              Accuracy                             Robustness
          Medical Knowledge Question             0.86                                 0.94
          Answering
          Medical Language Generation            0.76                                 /
          Medical Language Understand-           0.71                                 /
          ing
          Complex Medical Reasoning              0.72                                 /
          Healthcare Safety and Ethics           0.80                                 0.79



3.2   Error Distribution in Subjective Open-Domain Responses

A granular dissection of incorrect responses identified omissions of critical answer points as the dominant failure
mode (39.66% of errors), reflecting systemic deficiencies in comprehensive reasoning despite superficially coherent
outputs. Causal inference breakdowns (17.11%) and hallucinatory content generation (16.06%) constituted secondary
yet consequential flaws, while format mismatch accounted for 10.98% of errors (Figure 1), underscoring the need for
standardized output frameworks.




                                                                             Hallucination
                                                                                 (16.1)


                                          Omissions
                                            (39.7)




                                                                    Format Mismatch       Contextual Inconsistency
                                                                                                    (8.5)
                                                                          (11)




                                  Causal Reasoning Deficiency
                                                                                                       Deficiency
                                            (17.1)                   Output Error                      in Medical
                                                                                      Unanswered
                                                                                                       Language
                                                                        (4.1)            (1.9)
                                                                                                       Generation
                                                                                                          (1.6)




         Figure 1: The detailed distribution of incorrect answers shows its diversity and comprehensiveness.


                                                                3
3.3   Stratified Error Patterns Across Medical Competencies

Domain-specific failure profiles further elucidated model limitations (Figure 2). In Medical Knowledge Question
Answering, omissions dominated (44.40% of errors), followed by hallucinations (23.44%), exposing weak knowledge
boundary safeguards. For Medical Language Understanding, 34.30% of errors stemmed from unaddressed contextual
constraints, while 22.53% arose from fractured causal reasoning chains, indicating deficits in clinical narrative modeling.
Medical Language Generation exhibited severe hallucination (63.99% of errors), revealing semantic-clinical pragmatics
disconnects. Strikingly, Complex Medical Reasoning errors were overwhelmingly dominated by omissions (96.30%),
fundamentally undermining reasoning reliability.As documented in Table S2, a granular error taxonomy delineates the
classification schemas and clinical manifestations of these incorrect responses.



                            Medical Language Understanding                                   Complex Medical Reasoning

                                                           Contextual Inconsistency
                                                                   (15.91)
                                     Omissions
                                       (34.3)

                                                                                                                 Omissions
                                                                                Output                             (96.3)
                                                           Format Mismatch
                                                                                 Error
                                                               (13.85)
                                                                                (8.39)
                             Causal Reasoning Deficiency
                                       (22.53)
                                                              Unanswered
                                                                 (3.91)
                            Medical Knowledge Question Answering                             Medical Language Generation

                                                                                                                                  Omissions
                                                                 Causal Reasoning                                                  (15.49)
                                        Omissions                Deficiency (16.82)
                                          (44.4)

                                                                                                       Hallucination
                                                                                                          (63.99)              Deficiency in
                                                                                                                             Medical Language
                                                                  Format Mismatch                                            Generation (12.61)
                                                                      (12.94)
                                       Hallucination                                                                                               Format
                                          (23.44)                                                                            Causal Reasoning     Mismatch
                                                                                                                                                    (1.63)
                                                                                                                              Deficiency (5.75)
                                                                  Contextual Inconsistency                                                        Output Error
                                                                           (2.35)                                                                    (0.52)




                   Figure 2: Proportions of incorrect responses in labels under different dimensions


4     Discussion

Leveraging the authoritative medical LLMs evaluation system MedBench, we conducted an analytical assessment of
current mainstream models in the healthcare field and compiled the incorrect responses from the Top 10 models in the
evaluation rankings.
The robustness score of 0.79 for healthcare safety and ethics under shuffled options permutations reveals concerning
inconsistency in ethical decision-making scenarios. This could potentially be attributed to inadequate safety mechanisms
or insufficiently comprehensive datasets concerning drug contraindications and medical ethics information [13].
For example, the model may generate incorrect drug recommendations, ignore the patient’s allergy history or drug
contraindications, and directly threaten patient safety. At the same time, the model may lack an understanding of medical
ethics, such as patient privacy protection or fairness, resulting in output that does not meet specifications. Therefore,
enhance model safety protocols by integrating rigorously curated medical cases and ethical scenarios, particularly those
involving privacy protection, patient rights, and healthcare equity [14, 15, 16, 17]. Embed international medical ethics
guidelines and local legal frameworks as hard constraints for content generation. Strengthen pharmacological safety
[18, 19, 20] through expanded datasets covering drug contraindications, interactions [21], and duplicate medication
risks. Medical domain-specific models should prioritize these safety-critical considerations [17] during development
and deployment.
In medical knowledge question-answering, issues like information omission (44.40%) and hallucinations (23.44%)
reveal gaps in the training corpus, which lacks comprehensive coverage of key medical scenarios. This leads to
incomplete or fabricated outputs [22, 23], such as omitting critical details or generating nonexistent content, posing risks
in high-stakes medical contexts. To address this, models need domain-specific datasets, including medical textbooks
and clinical guidelines, to improve reliability. In medical language understanding, omissions (23.44%) and causal


                                                                                             4
reasoning (22.53%) deficiencies show models struggle to fully grasp questions, resulting in overinterpretation or
insufficient inference [24, 25]. For example, they may miss diagnostic criteria or fail to connect symptoms to diseases.
Enhancing this requires better training data and architectural improvements, such as integrating causal reasoning
modules or external knowledge graphs. In complex medical reasoning, omissions severely hinder performance. Tasks
like diagnosing patients require synthesizing multiple data points, but models often fail to integrate information
effectively, leading to fragmented outputs [26]. For instance, they might overlook critical diagnoses or prioritize unlikely
conditions. Improving this demands hierarchical reasoning frameworks or hybrid systems combining neural networks
with symbolic logic alongside training on annotated case studies and real-world scenarios.
The improvement suggestions for large medical LLMs can be structured into four levels based on technical complexity
and expected impact, progressing from simpler, high-yield enhancements to more advanced, long-term innovations. At
the first level, low-cost, high-return optimizations, the focus is on refining "surface-level" elements such as data quality,
prompt engineering, and parameter fine-tuning [27, 28]. For instance, cleaning noisy medical text, designing specialized
prompt templates [28, 29] for clinical scenarios, and employing techniques like LoRA for efficient fine-tuning can
significantly enhance baseline performance with minimal model modifications. Moving to the second level, domain-
specific adaptation, the goal is to bolster the model’s medical expertise through methods like knowledge-augmented
retrieval [30], multi-task joint training [31], and ethical constraint integration. This includes linking to authoritative
medical databases [32, 33, 34] for real-time evidence retrieval and training on diverse tasks such as diagnostic reasoning
and medical record generation [35] to improve overall competency. At the third level, architectural advancements, the
focus shifts to upgrading the model’s structure or introducing hybrid systems to tackle complex medical challenges.
Examples include combining symbolic logic with neural networks [36] to enhance diagnostic interpretability or
designing modular reasoning frameworks [37, 38, 39] to minimize error propagation, thereby addressing tasks requiring
advanced cognition or extended reasoning chains. Build real-time validation [40, 41] pipelines combining rule-based
filters and API-driven fact-checking. Finally, at the fourth level, cutting-edge exploration, the emphasis is on long-
term technological innovation, such as multimodal pre-training that integrates text [42], imaging, and genomic data,
transitioning from correlation-based learning to causal reasoning models [37, 38], and leveraging digital twin technology
[43, 44] to simulate virtual patient cohorts for training. While these efforts are technically demanding and may yield
limited immediate benefits, they lay the groundwork for future breakthroughs in medical AI. This tiered improvement
framework, progressing from simple to complex and from high-impact to foundational changes, not only addresses
current model limitations but also charts a clear path toward developing reliable and trustworthy medical AI systems.

5   Conclusion
The current mainstream Chinese medical models face challenges across multiple dimensions, including medical knowl-
edge question answering, language generation, and complex reasoning, while demonstrating room for improvement in
safety mechanisms and ethical constraints. Based on a hierarchical improvement framework, we propose a progressive
optimization pathway spanning from foundational data optimization and domain-specific knowledge enhancement to
architectural innovation. These findings not only provide actionable directions for enhancing the clinical applicability of
medical LLMs, but also validate the benchmarking value of MedBench in advancing medical AI technologies. Future
research should focus on exploring multimodal medical data integration and constructing causal reasoning mechanisms,
thereby facilitating the leapfrog development of medical LLMs from knowledge association to clinical decision support
systems.

References
 [1] T.B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
     A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv, 2020.
 [2] A.J. Thirunavukarasu, D.S.J. Ting, K. Elangovan, et al. Large language models in medicine. Nature Medicine,
     29:1930–1940, 2023.
 [3] H. Zhou, B. Gu, X. Zou, Y. Li, S.S. Chen, P. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Hua, C. Mao, X. Wu, et al. A survey of large
     language models in medicine: Progress, application, and challenge. ArXiv, 2023.
 [4] MD McCradden, S. Joshi, M. Mazwi, and JA Anderson. Ethical limitations of algorithmic fairness solutions in
     health care machine learning. The Lancet Digital Health, 2(5):e221–e223, 2020.
 [5] P. Liang, R. Bommasani, T. Lee, D. Tsipras, D. Soylu, M. Yasunaga, Y. Zhang, D. Narayanan, Y. Wu, A. Kumar,
     et al. Holistic evaluation of language models. ArXiv, 2022.
 [6] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D.X. Song, and J. Steinhardt. Measuring massive
     multitask language understanding. ArXiv, 2020.


                                                             5
 [7] D. Jin, E. Pan, N. Oufattole, W. Weng, H. Fang, and P. Szolovits. What disease does this patient have? a large-scale
     open domain question answering dataset from medical exams. ArXiv, 2020.
 [8] Y. Huang, Y. Bai, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Su, J. Liu, C. Lv, Y. Zhang, J. Lei, et al. C-eval: A multi-level
     multi-discipline chinese evaluation suite for foundation models. ArXiv, 2023.
 [9] M. Liu, W. Hu, J. Ding, et al. Medbench: A comprehensive, standardized, and reliable benchmarking system for
     evaluating chinese medical large language models. Big Data Mining and Analytics, 7(4):1116–1128, 2024.
[10] K. Singhal, T. Tu, J. Gottweis, et al. Toward expert-level medical question answering with large language models.
     Nature Medicine, 2025.
[11] V. Li’evin, C.E. Hother, and O. Winther. Can large language models reason about medical questions? Patterns, 5,
     2022.
[12] M. Moor, O. Banerjee, Z.S.H. Abad, et al. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelligence. Nature,
     616:259–265, 2023.
[13] Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, A. Yao, et al. Managing extreme ai risks amid rapid progress. Science, 384(6698):842–845,
     2024.
[14] L. Zhui, L. Fenghe, W. Xuehu, F. Qining, and R. Wei. Ethical considerations and fundamental principles of large
     language models in medical education: Viewpoint. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 26:e60083, 2024.
[15] H. Wang, W. Fu, Y. Tang, Z. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Piao, C. Gao, F. Xu, T. Jiang, and Y. Li. A survey on responsible
     llms: Inherent risk, malicious use, and mitigation strategy. ArXiv, 2025.
[16] J. Zhou, H. Li, X. Liao, B. Zhang, W. He, Z. Li, L. Zhou, and X. Gao. A unified method to revoke the private data
     of patients in intelligent healthcare with audit to forget. Nature Communications, 14, 2023.
[17] A. Haque, S. Siddique, M.M. Rahman, A.R. Hasan, L.R. Das, M. Kamal, T. Masura, and K.D. Gupta. Sok:
     Exploring hallucinations and security risks in ai-assisted software development with insights for llm deployment.
     2025.
[18] M. Chandra, S. Sriraman, G. Verma, H.S. Khanuja, J.S. Campayo, Z. Li, M.L. Birnbaum, and M.D. Choudhury.
     Lived experience not found: Llms struggle to align with experts on addressing adverse drug reactions from
     psychiatric medication use. ArXiv, 2024.
[19] G.D. Vito, F. Ferrucci, and A. Angelakis. Design and evaluation of a cdss for drug allergy management using llms
     and pharmaceutical data integration. ArXiv, 2024.
[20] P. Sahoo, A.K. Singh, S. Saha, A. Chadha, and S.S. Mondal. Enhancing adverse drug event detection with
     multimodal dataset: Corpus creation and model development. ArXiv, 2024.
[21] G.D. Vito, F. Ferrucci, and A. Angelakis. Llms for drug-drug interaction prediction: A comprehensive comparison.
     2025.
[22] T. McCoy et al. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuristics in natural language inference. In
     ACL, 2019.
[23] A. Holtzman et al. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In ICLR, 2020.
[24] L. Wang and Y. Shen. Evaluating causal reasoning capabilities of large language models: A systematic analysis
     across three scenarios. Electronics, 13(23):4584, 2024.
[25] N. Joshi, A. Saparov, Y. Wang, and H. He. Llms are prone to fallacies in causal inference. In Conference on
     Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2024.
[26] T. Kerner. Domain-specific pretraining of language models: A comparative study in the medical field. ArXiv,
     2024.
[27] S. Ni, K. Bi, J. Guo, L. Yu, B. Bi, and X. Cheng. Towards fully exploiting llm internal states to enhance knowledge
     boundary perception. 2025.
[28] Y. Liu, J. Xu, L.L. Zhang, Q. Chen, X. Feng, Y. Chen, Z. Guo, Y. Yang, and P. Cheng. Beyond prompt content:
     Enhancing llm performance via content-format integrated prompt optimization. 2025.
[29] Y. Lin, M. Hasan, R. Kosalge, A. Cheung, and A.G. Parameswaran. Twix: Automatically reconstructing structured
     data from templatized documents. ArXiv, 2025.
[30] ’.’ Kov’acs and G. Recski. Lettucedetect: A hallucination detection framework for rag applications. 2025.
[31] A. Toma, R. Xie, S. Palayew, P.R. Lawler, and B. Wang. Wanglab at mediqa-corr 2024: Optimized llm-based
     programs for medical error detection and correction. ArXiv, 2024.


                                                           6
[32] L. Qin, Y. Zhang, H. Liang, A. Jatowt, and Z. Yang. Listening to patients: A framework of detecting and mitigating
     patient misreport for medical dialogue generation. 2024.
[33] W. Liu, J. Tang, Y. Cheng, W. Li, Y. Zheng, and X. Liang. Meddg: An entity-centric medical consultation dataset
     for entity-aware medical dialogue generation. In Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing, 2020.
[34] R. Li, X. Wang, and H. Yu. Exploring llm multi-agents for icd coding. ArXiv, 2024.
[35] C. Shen, Z. Chen, D. Luo, D. Xu, H. Chen, and J. Ni. Exploring multi-modal integration with tool-augmented llm
     agents for precise causal discovery. ArXiv, 2024.
[36] R. Wang, K. Sun, and J. Kuhn. Dspy-based neural-symbolic pipeline to enhance spatial reasoning in llms. 2024.
[37] Y. Cui, P. He, J. Zeng, H. Liu, X. Tang, Z. Dai, Y. Han, C. Luo, J. Huang, Z. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xing, J. Tang, and
     Q. He. Stepwise perplexity-guided refinement for efficient chain-of-thought reasoning in large language models.
     2025.
[38] Z. Wu, Q. Zeng, Z. Zhang, Z. Tan, C. Shen, and M. Jiang. Enhancing mathematical reasoning in llms by stepwise
     correction. ArXiv, 2024.
[39] L. Zhong, Z. Du, X. Zhang, H. Hu, and J. Tang. Complexfuncbench: Exploring multi-step and constrained
     function calling under long-context scenario. ArXiv, 2025.
[40] S. Yang, R. Sun, and X. Wan. A new benchmark and reverse validation method for passage-level hallucination
     detection. ArXiv, 2023.
[41] N. Varshney, W. Yao, H. Zhang, J. Chen, and D. Yu. A stitch in time saves nine: Detecting and mitigating
     hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation. ArXiv, 2023.
[42] W. Liu, X. Ma, Y. Zhu, Z. Zhao, S. Wang, D. Yin, and Z. Dou. Sliding windows are not the end: Exploring full
     ranking with long-context large language models. ArXiv, 2024.
[43] Y. Xia, D. Dittler, N. Jazdi, H. Chen, and M. Weyrich. Llm experiments with simulation: Large language model
     multi-agent system for simulation model parametrization in digital twins. In 2024 IEEE 29th International
     Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), pages 1–4, 2024.
[44] R. Li, H. Xia, X. Yuan, Q. Dong, L. Sha, W. Li, and Z. Sui. How far are llms from being our digital twins? a
     benchmark for persona-based behavior chain simulation. 2025.




                                                          7
Supplementary Materials




                                      Table S1: Definition of assessment indicators

         Indicator                          Define
         Accuracy                           Accuracy refers to the proportion of the total number of correct
                                            model predictions, using the same option question cycle options
                                            to ask questions, the model output all point to the same answer
                                            that is correct, all correct for 100%
         Robustness                         The model’s robustness refers to its ability to produce fully con-
                                            sistent answers when presented with the same choice question
                                            where options are randomly shuffled
         Macro-Recall                       Macro-Recall calculates the recall based on each of the answer
                                            points designed in the quiz question separately, and then takes
                                            the average of these recalls for the score




                                                 Table S2.1: Omissions

    Question                           Answer Points                   Model Response
    肠结核有哪些临床表现？                        ["腹 痛", "大 便 习 惯 改         肠结核的临床表现主要包括：发热、
                                       变", "腹部肿块", "全身症           盗汗、消瘦、腹痛、腹泻、便秘、腹部
                                       状","低热", "盗汗", "贫血"]       包块等。其中，腹痛多位于右下腹或脐
                                                                  周，呈隐痛或钝痛，餐后加重，排便后
                                                                  减轻。腹泻与便秘可交替出现，腹泻多
                                                                  为糊状便，无脓血。腹部包块多位于右
                                                                  下腹，质地较硬，活动度差，有压痛。
                                                                  部分患者可有肠梗阻表现，如腹胀、呕
                                                                  吐等。
    What are the clinical mani-        ["abdominal pain", "change The clinical manifestations of intestinal
    festations of intestinal tuber-    in bowel habits", "abdomi- tuberculosis mainly include: fever, night
    culosis?                           nal mass", "systemic symp- sweats, emaciation, abdominal pain, diar-
                                       toms", "low-grade fever", rhea, constipation, abdominal mass, etc.
                                       "night sweats", "anemia"]  Among them, abdominal pain is mostly lo-
                                                                  cated in the right lower abdomen or around
                                                                  the umbilicus, which is hidden pain or dull
                                                                  pain, aggravated after meals and alleviated
                                                                  after defecation. Diarrhea and constipa-
                                                                  tion may occur alternately, and the diarrhea
                                                                  is mostly paste-like stool without pus and
                                                                  blood. Abdominal mass is mostly located
                                                                  in the right lower abdomen, hard texture,
                                                                  poor mobility, with pressure pain. Some pa-
                                                                  tients may have intestinal obstruction man-
                                                                  ifestations, such as abdominal distension
                                                                  and vomiting.


                                                            8
                                    Table S2.2: Hallucination

Question                    Answer Points                   Model Response
粒细胞缺乏症的定义是什                 ["中 性 粒 细 胞 绝 对 计 数",           粒细胞缺乏症是一种严重的血液疾病，
么?                          "0.51 × 109 L−1 "]              主要特征是血液中的中性粒细胞数量
                                                            极度减少或完全缺失。中性粒细胞是
                                                            白细胞的一种，主要负责抵抗感染。
                                                            因此，粒细胞缺乏症患者极易发生严重
                                                            的感染，病情危重，死亡率高。粒细胞
                                                            缺乏症的发生可能与多种因素有关，包
                                                            括粒细胞生成减少、成熟障碍、消耗过
                                                            多等。一些疾病，如再生障碍性贫血、
                                                            急性白血病、感染、肿瘤骨髓浸润等，
                                                            可能导致粒细胞减少症。维生素B12或
                                                            叶酸缺乏也可能导致粒细胞成熟障碍。
                                                            此外，系统性红斑狼疮、败血症、严重
                                                            感染等可能导致粒细胞过度消耗。粒细
                                                            胞缺乏症的治疗主要以升白细胞药物为
                                                            主，同时需要控制感染。肾上腺皮质激
                                                            素、升白细胞药物、粒细胞输注等方法
                                                            也可以用于缓解症状。患者需要注意休
                                                            息，保持局部卫生，避免感染，并避免
                                                            食用辛辣刺激性食物。
What is the definition of   ["Absolute neutrophil count",   Granulocyte deficiency is a serious blood
granulocyte deficiency?     "0.51 × 109 L−1 "]              disorder characterized by an extreme de-
                                                            crease or complete absence of neutrophils
                                                            in the blood. Neutrophils are a type of white
                                                            blood cell that is primarily responsible for
                                                            fighting off infections. Therefore, patients
                                                            with granulocyte deficiency are highly sus-
                                                            ceptible to serious infections, critical con-
                                                            ditions and high mortality rates. The devel-
                                                            opment of granulocyte deficiency may be
                                                            associated with a number of factors, includ-
                                                            ing decreased production of granulocytes,
                                                            impaired maturation, and excessive deple-
                                                            tion. Some diseases, such as aplastic ane-
                                                            mia, acute leukemia, infections, and bone
                                                            marrow infiltration of tumors, may lead to
                                                            granulocytopenia. Vitamin B12 or folate de-
                                                            ficiency may also lead to impaired granulo-
                                                            cyte maturation. In addition, systemic lupus
                                                            erythematosus, sepsis, and severe infections
                                                            may lead to excessive granulocyte depletion.
                                                            Treatment of granulocyte deficiency is pri-
                                                            marily based on leukocyte-boosting drugs,
                                                            and infection control is required. Adreno-
                                                            corticotropic hormone, leukocyte-boosting
                                                            drugs, and granulocyte infusion can also be
                                                            used to relieve symptoms. Patients need to
                                                            pay attention to rest, maintain local hygiene,
                                                            avoid infection, and avoid spicy and irritat-
                                                            ing foods.




                                                9
                                     Table S2.3: Format Mismatch
Question                           Answer Points                           Model Response
医学命名实体识别任务：                        "药物": []                                药物：
请从给定医学文本中，                         "医疗设备": []                              医疗设备：
识别出命名实体。                           "医院科室": []                              医院科室：
实体识别的格式为：                          "微生物类":[]                               微生物类：
药物：""                              "身体部位": []                              身体部位：
医疗设备：""                            "医疗程序": []                              医疗程序：
医院科室：""                            "医学检验项目": []                            医学检验项目：
微生物类：""                            "症状和体征": ["FMR-1基因的突变"]                 症状和体征：
身体部位：""                            "疾病": ["脆性X综合征"]                        疾病：脆性X综合征
医疗程序：""                            "Drugs": []                             基因：FMR-1基因
医学检验项目：""                          "Medical devices": []                   Drugs:
症状和体征：""                           "Hospital units": []                    Medical Equipment:
疾病：""                              "Microbiology": []                      Hospital Departments:
Medical Named Entity               “Body parts": []                        Microbiology:
Recognition Task:                  "Medical procedures": []                Body Parts:
Please identify named              "Medical tests": []                     Medical Procedures:
entities from a given medical      "Symptoms and signs": ["Mutations in    Medical Test Program:
text.                              the FMR-1 gene"]                        Signs and symptoms:
The format for entity              “Diseases": ["Fragile X syndrome"]      Disease: fragile X syndrome
identification is:                                                         Gene: FMR-1 gene
Drug: ""
Medical device: ""
Hospital department: “”
Microorganisms: “”
Body part: “”
Medical Procedures:"”
Medical Test Programs:"”
Signs and symptoms:"”
Diseases:"”


                                Table S2.4: Causal Reasoning Deficiency

Question                                 Answer Points          Model Response
现 病 史-病 史 摘 要 ： 赵 某 ，                    ["先 天 性 胆 管 扩 张        本例患儿的诊断可能为胆道梗阻导致的
男 ，7岁 ，3天 前 无 明 显 诱 因 出 现                症", "腹部疼痛", "高         阻塞性黄疸，具体原因需进一步明确。
腹部疼痛，伴寒战高热，最高体                           热", "寒战", "黄染",        诊断依据包括：
温38.7°C，于当地行“退热止痛”治疗后                    "直 接 胆 红 素", "囊
未见明显好转。患儿于1天前出现皮肤                        样扩张"]
黄染，同时伴巩膜黄染，精神差，营养
状况较差。病儿自发病以来，精神睡眠
差，饮食差，大便成形，偶呈陶土样
色，尿呈浓茶样色。
主诉：腹痛高热3天，伴皮肤黄染1天。                                              1. 临床症状：患儿出现腹痛、寒战、
                                                                高热，随后出现皮肤和巩膜黄染，精神
                                                                差，营养状况较差。这些症状提示可能
                                                                存在感染和/或肝脏疾病。
                                                                                            next page




                                                   10
                                                 Continued from above
Question                                          Answer Points         Model Response
体格检查：T38.5°C，P92次/分，R22次/分，Bp110/78mmHg。                                2. 体格检查：皮肤和巩膜黄染，上肢皮
发育正常，营养中等，自主体位，查体                                                       下出血点，肝脏肿大，质地坚硬，右上
合作，全身皮肤及巩膜黄染，上肢皮肤                                                       腹压痛，这些体征进一步支持肝脏疾病
可见散在皮下出血点，全身浅表未及肿                                                       和/或胆道问题。
大淋巴结。两肺呼吸音粗，未闻及干湿
音。心率92次/分，律齐，未闻及病理
性杂音。腹部略膨隆，肝脏肿大，表面
光滑，质地坚硬，边缘圆钝，于肝区
肋弓下可触及一肿物，形状规则，大
小约3cm×2cm，右上腹压痛，反跳痛
（±），全腹叩诊鼓音，移动性浊音阴
性，肠鸣可闻及。
辅 助 检 查-实 验 室 检 查-                                                      3. 实验室检查：血常规显示白细胞升
血     常    规      ：WBC15.91   ×                                         高，中性粒细胞比例增高，提示有感
109 L−1 ，NEU89.7%，RBC3.74     ×                                         染的可能。肝功能异常，ALT和AST轻
1012 L−1 ，Hb115 g L−1 ，PLT286 ×                                         度升高，总胆红素和直接胆红素显著升
109 L−1 。           肝         功                                         高，碱性磷酸酶和谷氨酰转移酶显著升
能         ：ALT70 U/L，AST56 U/L；                                         高，这些都是胆道梗阻和肝细胞损伤的
总 胆 红 素176 µmol L−1 ， 间 接                                               标志。
胆 红 素25 µmol L−1 ， 直 接 胆
红 素151 µmol L−1 ； 碱 性 磷
酸 酶984 U/L； 谷 氨 酰 转 移
酶1065.5 U/L。
影像学表现-腹部CT平扫：1.CT检查显                                                    4. 影像学检查：腹部CT平扫显示胆总
示胆总管呈巨大囊样扩张。2.胆囊体积                                                      管呈巨大囊样扩张，胆囊体积增大，但
增大。3.无肝内胆管远端分支扩张。                                                       无肝内胆管远端分支扩张。这表明胆道
                                                                        系统存在异常，可能是胆道梗阻的直接
                                                                        证据。
简述本例病人的诊断及诊断依据。                                                         综合上述临床表现、体格检查、实验
                                                                        室检查和影像学检查，可以初步诊
                                                                        断为胆道梗阻导致的阻塞性黄疸。
                                                                        但是，需要进一步的检查，如胆道
                                                                        超 声 、MRCP（ 磁 共 振 胰 胆 管 造 影 ）
                                                                        或ERCP（内镜逆行胰胆管造影）等，
                                                                        以确定梗阻的具体位置和原因，可能是
                                                                        胆结石、胆道炎症、先天性胆道异常或
                                                                        其他原因所致。
Present Medical History-Summary of his-
tory: Zhao Mou, male, 7 years old, had
abdominal pain with chills and high fever
with a maximum temperature of 38.7°C 3
days ago without any obvious cause, and
did not show significant improvement af-
ter local treatment of “antipyretic and anal-
gesic”. The child developed skin yellow-
ing 1 day ago, accompanied by scleral yel-
lowing, poor mental health and poor nutri-
tional status. Since the onset of the disease,
the child had poor mental sleep, poor diet,
formed stools, occasionally clay-like color,
and urine was strong tea-like color.
                                                                                             next page




                                                          11
                                                 Continued from above
Question                                          Answer Points              Model Response
简述。                                               ["congenital chole-        The diagnosis of this child may be obstruc-
                                                  docholithiasis",           tive jaundice due to biliary obstruction, the
                                                  "abdominal       pain",    exact cause of which requires further clari-
                                                  "high fever", "chills",    fication.The diagnostic basis includes:
                                                  "yellow          stain",
                                                  "direct     bilirubin",
                                                  "cystic dilatation"]
Complaints: Abdominal pain and high fever                                    1. Clinical symptoms: the child presented
for 3 days, accompanied by skin yellowing                                    with abdominal pain, chills, and high fever,
for 1 day.                                                                   followed by yellowing of the skin and
                                                                             sclera, poor mental health, and poor nutri-
                                                                             tional status. These symptoms are sugges-
                                                                             tive of possible infection and/or liver dis-
                                                                             ease.
Physical      examination:          T38.5°C,                                 2. Physical examination: yellowing of the
P92      beats/min,       R22      beats/min,                                skin and sclera, subcutaneous hemorrhagic
Bp110/78mmHg.Development is nor-                                             spots on the upper extremities, an enlarged,
mal, nutrition is moderate, autonomous                                       firm liver, and right upper abdominal ten-
position, cooperation in physical ex-                                        derness are signs that further support the
amination, generalized skin and sclera                                       presence of liver disease and/or biliary tract
yellow staining, scattered subcutaneous                                      problems.
hemorrhages can be seen on the skin of the
upper limbs, generalized superficial not
found enlarged lymph nodes. Respiratory
sounds in both lungs were coarse, and
no dry or wet rales were detected. Heart
rate was 92 beats/minute, rhythmic, no
pathological murmur was heard. The
abdomen was slightly distended, the liver
was enlarged, smooth surface, hard texture,
rounded edges, a mass was palpable under
the costal arch of the liver area, regular
shape, size about 3cm×2cm, pressure pain
in the right epigastric region, rebound pain
(±), tympanic sound on percussion in the
whole abdomen, mobile turbid sound was
negative, and intestinal tinnitus could be
heard.
Auxiliary          examination-Laboratory                                    3. Laboratory tests: Blood counts show
exa-mination-Blood                   routine:                                elevated leukocytes and an increased per-
WBC15.91 × 109 L−1 , NEU89.7%,                                               centage of neutrophils,suggesting infection.
RBC3.74 × 1012 L−1 , Hb115 g L−1 ,                                           Liver function is abnormal with mild eleva-
PLT286 × 109 L−1 .Liver                functi-                               tions of ALT and AST,significant elevations
on:      ALT70 U/L, AST56 U/L; to-                                           of total and direct bilirubin, and significant
tal    bilirubin176 µmol L−1 ,       indirect                                elevations of alkaline phosphatase and glu-
bilirubin25 µmol L−1 ,       direct    biliru-                               tamyltransferase, all of which are markers
bin 151 µmol L−1 ;          alkaline phos-                                   of biliary obstruction and hepatocellular in-
phatase 984 U/L; glutamyl transferase                                        jury.
1065.5 U/L.
                                                                                                                next page




                                                            12
                                               Continued from above
Question                                        Answer Points         Model Response
Imaging manifestations-Abdominal CT                                   4. Imaging: CT scan of the abdomen shows
plain scan1. CT examination showed a huge                             a huge cystic dilatation of the common bile
cystic dilatation of the common bile duct.2.                          duct and an increase in gallbladder volume
Increased gallbladder volume.3. No dilata-                            without dilatation of the distal branches of
tion of the distal branches of the intrahep-                          the intrahepatic bile ducts. This indicates an
atic bile duct.                                                       abnormality in the biliary system and may
                                                                      be direct evidence of biliary obstruction.
Briefly describe the diagnosis and diagnos-                           Taking into account the above clinical mani-
tic basis of this patient.                                            festations, physical examination, laboratory
                                                                      tests and imaging studies, a preliminary di-
                                                                      agnosis of obstructive jaundice due to bil-
                                                                      iary obstruction can be made. However,
                                                                      further investigations such as biliary ultra-
                                                                      sound, MRCP (magnetic resonance cholan-
                                                                      giopancreatography) or ERCP (endoscopic
                                                                      retrograde cholangiopancreatography) are
                                                                      needed to determine the exact location and
                                                                      cause of the obstruction, which may be due
                                                                      to gallstones, biliary inflammation, congen-
                                                                      ital biliary anomalies or other causes.


                                    Table S2.5: Causal Reasoning Deficiency

Question                                        Answer Points         Model Response
现病史-病史摘要：陈XX，男，65岁，                             ["止血", "输血", "液       1.该病例出血原因考虑为结肠病变，反
近一周来反复排暗红色血便，伴头晕乏                               体平衡", "电解质及           复出血考虑为慢性失血，半天前大量
力。半天前再次排血便，量约600ml，                             酸碱平衡"]                出血为慢性失血急性加重。病人体重偏
并出现神志淡漠，尿量减少，12小时尿                                                    轻，平时饮食习惯不佳，半天前大量出
量为200ml。无发热、恶心、呕吐，既                                                   血后尿量减少，考虑血容量不足，急性
往病史无特殊。                                                               肾损伤。根据病人的血红蛋白水平及结
                                                                      肠镜检查结果，应予以输血补液，纠正
                                                                      贫血，维持水电解质平衡，同时请肛肠
                                                                      外科会诊讨论是否手术治疗。
主诉：反复排血便1周，加重伴少尿半                                                     2.在补充血容量后，病人尿量增加，肌
天。                                                                    酐可缓慢下降至正常。若肌酐继续上
                                                                      升，考虑行肾脏替代治疗。
体 格 检 查 ： 生 命 体                                                       2.在补充血容量后，病人尿量增加，肌
征T36.8°C，P105次/分，R20次/分，Bp90/60mmHg。                                  酐可缓慢下降至正常。若肌酐继续上
体重60kg。自主体位，神志淡漠，呼之                                                   升，考虑行肾脏替代治疗。
可对答。全身皮肤及巩膜较苍白，四肢
偏凉。两肺呼吸音清晰，未闻及干湿
音。心率105次/分，律齐，未闻及病理
性杂音。腹部平软，肝脾不大，肠鸣音
活跃。双肾区无叩痛，双下肢无水肿。
                                                                                                         next page




                                                        13
                                               Continued from above
Question                                        Answer Points           Model Response
辅 助 检 查-血 液 分 析 ： 白 细 胞 计                                               3.病人的贫血主要原因为消化道出血，
数8.8 × 109 L−1 ，中性粒细胞比例0.7，                                             为缺铁性贫血，待病人病情稳定后，可
红 细 胞 计 数2.8 × 1012 L−1 ， 血 红 蛋                                         予以补充铁剂。
白78 g L−1 。尿液分析：尿比重1.030，
尿白细胞（-），尿潜血（-），尿蛋白
（-）。大便潜血：（+），胃潜血：（-
） 。 生 化 电 解 质 ： 钾4.5 mmol L−1 ，
钠138 mmol L−1 ， 氯103.5 mmol L−1 ，
二 氧 化 碳 结 合 力22 mmol L−1 。 肝
肾 功 能 ： 尿 素 氮9.8 mmol L−1 ， 肌
酐201 µmol L−1 ，谷丙转氨酶10 U/L，
谷 草 转 氨 酶20 U/L。 纤 维 结 肠 镜 检
查：提示降结肠及直肠可见弥漫出血
点。B超检查：肝、胆、脾、胰及泌尿
系B超无特殊。
简述本例病人的治疗原则。
Present Medical History-Summary of his-         ["Hemostasis",          1. The cause of bleeding in this case is
tory: Chen XX, male, 65 years old, had          "Transfusion", "Fluid   considered to be colonic lesions, repeated
repeated dark red blood stools with dizzi-      balance",      “Elec-   bleeding is considered to be chronic blood
ness and fatigue in the past week. Half a       trolyte and acid-base   loss, and massive bleeding half a day ago
day ago, he passed blood stool again, with a    balance"]               is an acute exacerbation of chronic blood
volume of about 600 ml, and appeared to be                              loss. The patient’s light weight, poor di-
apathetic, with a decreased urine output of                             etary habits in general, and decreased urine
200 ml in 12 h. There was no fever, nausea,                             output after massive bleeding half a day
or vomiting, and his past medical history                               ago are considered to be hypovolemia and
was unremarkable.                                                       acute kidney injury. According to the pa-
                                                                        tient’s hemoglobin level and colonoscopy
                                                                        results, blood transfusion and fluid replace-
                                                                        ment should be given to correct anemia and
                                                                        maintain the water-electrolyte balance, and
                                                                        at the same time, we should ask the anorec-
                                                                        tal surgery department to consult and dis-
                                                                        cuss whether surgical treatment.
Complaints: Recurrent bloody stools for 1                               2. After supplementing blood volume, the
week, aggravated with oliguria for half a                               patient’s urine output increases, and crea-
day.                                                                    tinine may slowly decrease to normal. If
                                                                        creatinine continues to rise, consider renal
                                                                        replacement therapy.
Vital signs: T36.8°C, P105 beats/min,                                   3. The patient’s anemia is mainly caused
R20 beats/min, Bp90/60mmHg. weight                                      by gastrointestinal bleeding, which is iron
60kg.He was in voluntary position, apa-                                 deficiency anemia. After the patient’s con-
thetic, and could answer when called. The                               dition is stabilized, iron supplements can be
skin and sclera were pale, and the limbs                                given.
were cold. Breath sounds of both lungs
were clear, and no dry or wet rales were
heard. Heart rate was 105 beats/minute,
rhythmic, no pathological murmur was
heard. The abdomen was flat and soft, the
liver and spleen were not large, and bowel
sounds were active. There was no tender-
ness in both kidneys and no edema in both
lower limbs.
                                                                                                          next page




                                                         14
                                                Continued from above
Question                                         Answer Points           Model Response
Auxiliary      examination-Blood        anal-
ysis:        white blood cell count
8.8 × 109 L−1 , neutrophil ratio 0.7,
red blood cell count2.8 × 1012 L−1 ,
hemoglobin78 g L−1 .Urinalysis:         urine
specific gravity 1.030, urine leukocytes
(-), urine occult blood (-), urine pro-
tein (-).Fecal occult blood: (+), gastric
occult blood:        (-).Biochemical elec-
trolytes: potassium 4.5 mmol L−1 , sodium
138 mmol L−1 , chloride103.5 mmol L−1 ,
carbon      dioxide      binding    capacity
22 mmol L−1 .Liver and kidney func-
tion:      urea nitrogen 9.8 mmol L−1 ,
creatinine      201 µmol L−1 ,       alanine
aminotransferase10 U/L, azelaic amino-
transferase 20 U/L.Fiber colonoscopy: sug-
gesting diffuse bleeding spots visible in the
descending colon and rectum.Ultrasound
examination: liver, gallbladder, spleen,
pancreas and urinary tract ultrasound is not
special.
Briefly describe the principles of treatment
for this patient.


                                                Table S2.6: Unanswered

Question                                                       Answer Points              Model Response
现病史-病史摘要：病人2017年8月15日夜间驾驶摩                                     ["腹腔感染", "脓毒症", "多
托车被出租车横向撞伤，当时诉腹部胀痛、左膝疼                                         脏器功能障碍"]
痛，急症入六安市人民医院，给予保守治疗腹痛未
见明显好转，且腹痛加重。2017年8月17日转至安
医大二附院，检查提示腹腔积液明显，急诊剖腹探
查。术中见腹盆腔大量肠液样液体，约2000ml，全
小肠肠壁炎症水肿，距屈氏韧带约45cm处小肠系膜
撕裂，致约40cm小肠发黑，并可见2处破裂口。行
小肠部分切除肠吻合+小肠结肠浆肌层修补术。术
后病人持续高热，最高40摄氏度，低血压、乳酸
持续性升高，最高7.66mmol/L，转至ICU给予呼吸
机辅助呼吸、血管活性药物等治疗，病人未见明
显好转。于2017年8月21日夜间8时转入我院，入院
时病人神志淡漠，呼吸机辅助呼吸，心率增快，
约130次/分；血压130/80mmHg左右；体温38.3°C，
给予拔除腔静脉导管；抽取血培养，亚安培南+伏
立康唑抗感染；给予抑酸、抑酶，静脉营养支
持；监测膀胱压；病人全身组织水肿明显，限
制液体输入，给予蛋白后利尿（24小时共出尿液
约7000ml）。
主诉：车祸外伤术后多脏器功能障碍3天。
                                                                                                   next page




                                                          15
                                Continued from above
Question                                     Answer Points   Model Response
体格检查（1）一般情况：神志模糊，精神欠佳，慢
性病容，表情痛苦，发育正常，营养中等，匀称，
抬入病房，被动体位，查体合作，语言正常，声音
低微，对答切题。（2）专科情况：腹部膨隆，腹式
呼吸存在，无腹壁静脉曲张，未见肠型及蠕动波，
无压痛及反跳痛，未触及包块。腹部正中可见一手
术伤口，少量脓性液体，腹部可见右侧两根腹腔引
流管。肝脾肋下未触及，未触及胆囊，Murphy征阳
性。腹部鼓音区未及，无移动性浊音。肝上界位
于右锁骨中线第5肋间，下界位于右季肋下缘，肝
区无叩痛，脾浊音区正常，胆囊区无叩痛。肠鸣音
弱，1次/分，未闻及血管杂音及摩擦音。
辅 助 检 查 （1） 实 验 室 检 查 ： 白 细 胞 计 数9.5 ×
109 L−1 ， 红 细 胞 计 数3.28 × 1012 L−1 ， 血 红 蛋
白98 g L−1 ， 血 小 板 计 数498 × 109 L−1 ，C反 应 蛋
白74.9 mg L−1 。（2）X线检查：床边胸片提示两肺
炎症，左侧胸腔少量积液。（3）CT检查：提示腹
腔广泛渗出。
病 情 变 化 ：2017年8月22日19时 体 温 升 高 ， 最
高39°C，20时血压下降，最低77/34mmHg；心率升
高 ， 最 高140次/分 。 给 予 加 快 输 液 速 度 ， 补 充 晶
体液；同时给予白蛋白、红悬、血浆等补充胶体
液；给予冷沉淀改善凝血功能；22时病人血压恢复
至120/80mmHg左右，心率恢复至80次/分。
该病人可下哪些诊断？
                                                                      next page




                                        16
                                                Continued from above
Question                                                         Answer Points   Model Response
Present Medical History-Summary of medical history:
The patient was driving a motorcycle at night on August
15, 2017 and was hit by a cab horizontally, at that time, he
complained of abdominal distension and pain, left knee
pain, and was admitted to the Lu’an People’s Hospital in
an emergency, and was given conservative treatment for
abdominal pain which did not show any significant im-
provement and worsening of the abdominal pain.He was
referred to the Second Affiliated Hospital of the Anhui
University of Medical Science and Technology on August
17, 2017, and his examination suggested that there was
obvious accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity,
and he was urgently admitted to the hospital by caesarean
section. Intraoperatively, a large amount of intestinal fluid-
like fluid was seen in the abdominopelvic cavity, about
2,000 ml, inflammation and edema of the intestinal wall of
the whole small intestine, and the mesenteric laceration of
the small intestine about 45 cm from the flexural ligament,
which resulted in the blackness of the small intestine of
about 40 cm and 2 rupture orifices were seen. Partial re-
section of small bowel with intestinal anastomosis + small
bowel colonic plasma muscle layer repair was performed.
Postoperatively, the patient had persistent high fever up
to 40 degrees Celsius, hypotension, persistent elevation
of lactate up to 7.66 mmol/L. He was transferred to ICU
and given ventilator-assisted respiration, vasoactive drugs,
etc., and the patient did not show significant improvement.
Transferred to our hospital at 8:00 p.m. on the night of
August 21, 2017, at the time of admission, the patient
was apathetic, ventilator-assisted respiration, heart rate in-
creased, about 130 beats/min; blood pressure about 130/80
mmHg; temperature 38.3 °C, given to remove the vena
cava catheter; blood culture was taken, subamphetamine
+ voriconazole anti-infective; acid suppression, enzyme
suppression, intravenous nutritional support was given;
bladder pressure was monitored; the patient’s systemic
tissue Edema was obvious, fluid intake was restricted, and
post-protein diuresis was given (a total of about 7000 ml
of urine was produced in 24 hours).
Main complaint:Multi-organ dysfunction for 3 days after
car accident trauma.
                                                                                          next page




                                                           17
                                               Continued from above
Question                                                        Answer Points   Model Response
Physical examination(1) General condition: Ambiguous,
mentally ill, chronic look, painful expression, normal de-
velopment, moderate nutrition, well-proportioned, carried
into the ward, passive position, cooperative in body check-
ing, normal speech, low voice, tangential answers.(2) Spe-
cialized conditions:The abdomen was distended, abdom-
inal respiration was present, no abdominal wall varices,
no bowel pattern or peristaltic wave was seen, no pressure
pain or rebound pain, and no mass was palpable. A sur-
gical wound with a small amount of purulent fluid was
seen in the middle of the abdomen, and two abdominal
drains on the right side were seen in the abdomen. Liver
and spleen were not palpated subcostally, gallbladder was
not palpated and Murphy’s sign was positive. Abdominal
tympanic area was not reached and there was no mobile
turbidity. The upper border of the liver was located at the
5th intercostal space in the right midclavicular line and the
lower border was located at the lower border of the right
quaternary ribs; there was no percussion pain in the hep-
atic region, the splenic turbid zone was normal, and there
was no percussion pain in the gallbladder region. Bowel
sounds were weak, 1 beats/minute, no vascular murmur
or friction sounds were heard.
Auxiliary examination(1) Laboratory tests:White blood
cell count 9.5 × 109 L−1 , red blood cell count 3.28 ×
1012 L−1 , hemoglobin 98 g L−1 , platelet count 498 ×
109 L−1 , C-reactive protein 74.9 mg L−1 .(2) X-ray exam-
ination:Bedside chest radiograph suggested inflammation
in both lungs and a small amount of fluid in the left pleural
cavity.(3) CT examination:Suggests extensive exudation
in the abdominal cavity.
Disease change:At 19:00 on August 22, 2017, the body
temperature increased, with a maximum of 39°C. At 20:00,
the blood pressure decreased, with a minimum of 77/34
mmHg; the heart rate increased, with a maximum of 140
beats/min. Accelerated infusion rate was given to replen-
ish crystalloid; albumin, red suspension, and plasma were
also given to replenish colloid fluids; cold precipitation
was given to improve coagulation; at 2200 hours, the pa-
tient’s blood pressure recovered to about 120/80 mmHg,
and the heart rate recovered to 80 beats/min.
What diagnosis can be made in this patient?




                                                          18
                                             Table S2.7: Output Error

   Question                                        Answer Points                Model Response
   任务：将给定实体进行归一化，从候选                               睾丸恶性肿瘤##胚胎性癌                 鳞状细胞癌##颊部血管畸
   的若干个ICD-10诊断标准词中选择出与                                                         形##糖尿病##脐部感染
   原诊断描述匹配的词。
   输入医学短语：
   右侧睾丸胚胎癌
   候选标准词：
   甲状腺恶性肿瘤##癌##肺继发恶性肿
   瘤##恶性肿瘤放疗##转移性癌
   子宫颈恶性肿瘤##鳞状细胞癌##高血压
   麦克尔憩室##小肠憩室炎
   抑郁发作##脑血管病
   颊部血管畸形
   睾丸恶性肿瘤##胚胎性癌
   归一化术语：
   TASK: Normalize a given entity to select        Testicular    malignant      Squamous     cell    carci-
   from a candidate number of ICD-10 diag-         tumors##Embryonal carci-     noma##Buccal      vascular
   nostic criteria words that match the original   noma                         malformation       ##Dia-
   diagnostic description.：                                                     betes##Umbilical      cord
                                                                                infection
   Enter the medical phrase:
   Embryonal carcinoma of the right testis
   Candidate Criteria Words:
   Thyroid malignancy##Cancer##Secondary
   malignant tumor of lung##Radiotherapy for
   malignancy##Metastatic cancer
   malignant tumor of the cervix##squamous
   cell carcinoma##hypertension
   Michael’s diverticulum##Small bowel di-
   verticulitis
   Depressive episodes ##Cerebrovascular dis-
   ease
   Buccal vascular malformations
   Testicular malignancy ##embryonic carci-
   noma
   Normalized Terminology:


                                            Table S2.8: Unanswered

Question                                      Answer Points             Model Response
任务：假设你是一位专业医生，请根据                             "主诉": ["呕吐", "咳           主诉：“宝宝四个月，最近几天老吐豆
以下医患对话记录，为患者总结问诊报                             嗽", "流清涕"], "现            腐渣那种，偶尔咳嗽，不发烧，偶尔流
告。                                            病史": ["呕吐", "豆            清鼻涕。”
                                              腐 渣 样", "咳 嗽",
                                              "流 清 涕", "金 益 贝
                                              康", "蒙脱石"], "诊
                                              断": ["肠 炎"], "建
                                              议": ["医 院", "化
                                              验"]
                                                                                                    next page




                                                        19
                    Continued from above
Question             Answer Points         Model Response
要求输出格式为：                                   现病史：“患儿四个月大，近期出现呕
                                           吐（豆腐渣样），偶尔咳嗽，无发烧，
                                           偶尔流清鼻涕，近四五天大便四五次，
                                           目前正在服用金益贝康、蒙脱石和未说
                                           明名称的小颗白药。”
主诉：“”                                      辅助检查：“未进行大便化验。”
现病史：“”                                     既往史：“无特殊既往病史。”
辅助检查：“”                                    诊断：“怀疑婴儿胃肠道疾病，需排除
                                           肠炎。”
既往史：“”               建议：“建议去医院
                     进行大便化验，以
                     排除肠炎。继续母
                     乳喂养，观察宝宝
                     的精神状态和吃奶
                     情况，注意宝宝的
                     脱水症状。”
诊断：“”
建议：“”
问诊对话：
患者：宝宝四个月，最近几天老吐豆腐
渣那种。是怎么回事？前几天拉肚子，
在吃药
医生：您好
患者：你好
医生：每天几次大便
患者：请问宝宝四个月
医生：咳嗽，流鼻涕，发烧不
患者：最近老吐豆腐渣那种
患者：偶尔咳嗽
患者：不发烧
患者：偶尔流清鼻涕
医生：每天几次大便
患者：这几天都是四五次
医生：宝宝现在是母乳喂养吗
医生：吃奶好不
患者：恩母乳
患者：好
医生：精神状态怎么样
患者：好
医生：现在用什么药呢
患者：金益贝康，和蒙脱石
医生：化验大便没
患者：还有一些小颗白药
患者：没那
医生：腹泻几天了
患者：有四五天了
医生：这种情况建议去医院化验大便看
看排除肠炎
                                                            next page




                             20
                                               Continued from above
Question                                        Answer Points            Model Response
TASK: Assuming you are a medical profes-        "complaints": ["vom- Complaint: "The baby is four months old,
sional, summarize the consultation report       iting",      "cough", the last few days old vomiting tofu dregs
for the patient based on the following tran-    "runny         nose"], kind, occasional cough, no fever, occasional
script of the doctor-patient conversation.      "medical history": runny nose."
                                                ["vomiting", "tofu
                                                scum-like", "cough",
                                                "runny nose", "Gold
                                                Ibuprofen", “mon-
                                                telukast"],“diagnosis":["enterocolitis"],
                                                "advice": ["hospital",
                                                "laboratory"]
The required output format is:                                           Present Medical History: "The child is four
                                                                         months old and has recently developed vom-
                                                                         iting (tofu dregs kind), occasional cough, no
                                                                         fever, occasional runny nose, four or five
                                                                         bowel movements in the last four or five
                                                                         days, and is currently taking Gold Ibupro-
                                                                         fen, Montelukast, and unspecified name of
                                                                         a small white pill."
Chief complaint:"”                                                       SUPPORTING EXAMINATION: "No
                                                                         stool tests were performed."
Present medical history:""                                               PAST HISTORY: "No specific past medical
                                                                         history."
Ancillary examination:""                                                 DIAGNOSIS: "Gastrointestinal disease is
                                                                         suspected in the infant and enterocolitis
                                                                         needs to be ruled out."
Past history:""                                                          RECOMMENDATION: "It is recom-
                                                                         mended to go to the hospital for a stool test
                                                                         to rule out enteritis. Continue breastfeeding,
                                                                         observe the baby’s mental status and milk
                                                                         intake, and watch for signs of dehydration."
Diagnosis: ""
Recommendations:""
Interview dialog:
PATIENT: The baby is four months old and
has been spitting up the tofu crumb kind
for the last few days. What’s going on? He
had diarrhea a few days ago and was on
medication
Doctor: Hello
Patient: Hello
Doctor：How many times a day
Patient: Your baby is four months old.
Doctor：cough, runny nose, fever not
Patient: Recently, he has been vomiting
Patient: occasional cough
Patient: No fever
Patient: occasional runny nose
Doctor：How many times a day
Patient: 4 or 5 times in the past few days
Doctor: Is your baby breastfeeding?
Doctor：How is breastfeeding?
Patient: Yes, breast milk
Patient: Yes
Doctor：How is your mental state?
                                                                                                            next page


                                                         21
                                                  Continued from above
Question                                           Answer Points         Model Response
Patient: Good
Doctor：What kind of medicine are you
using now?
Patient：Golden Ibuprofen and Mon-
telukast
Doctor：Have you had any stool tests?
Patient: And some small white pills
Patient: No
Doctor：How many days have you had di-
arrhea?
Patient: four or five days
Doctor：In this case, it is recommended to
go to the hospital for a stool test to rule out
enteritis.




                                                           22
