                                         AI Hospital: Benchmarking Large Language Models
                                            in a Multi-agent Medical Interaction Simulator


                                                        Zhihao Fan1 , Jialong Tang1 , Wei Chen2∗, Siyuan Wang3 , Zhongyu Wei3 ,
                                                                          Jun Xie1 , Fei Huang1 , Jingren Zhou1
                                                    1
                                                      Alibaba Inc., Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 3 Fudan University
                                                                   2




arXiv:2402.09742v4 [cs.CL] 28 Jun 2024
                                                                             1
                                                                               fanzhihao.fzh@alibaba-inc.com



                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     Artificial intelligence has significantly advanced healthcare, particularly through
                                                     large language models (LLMs) that excel in medical question answering bench-
                                                     marks. However, their real-world clinical application remains limited due to the
                                                     complexities of doctor-patient interactions. To address this, we introduce AI Hos-
                                                     pital, a multi-agent framework simulating dynamic medical interactions between
                                                     Doctor as player and NPCs including Patient, Examiner, Chief Physician. This
                                                     setup allows for realistic assessments of LLMs in clinical scenarios. We develop
                                                     the Multi-View Medical Evaluation (MVME) benchmark, utilizing high-quality
                                                     Chinese medical records and NPCs to evaluate LLMs’ performance in symptom
                                                     collection, examination recommendations, and diagnoses. Additionally, a dispute
                                                     resolution collaborative mechanism is proposed to enhance diagnostic accuracy
                                                     through iterative discussions. Despite improvements, current LLMs exhibit signifi-
                                                     cant performance gaps in multi-turn interactions compared to one-step approaches.
                                                     Our findings highlight the need for further research to bridge these gaps and im-
                                                     prove LLMs’ clinical diagnostic capabilities. Our data, code, and experimental
                                                     results are all open-sourced at https://github.com/LibertFan/AI_Hospital.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Healthcare has seen significant progress with artificial intelligence in recent years [1], especially
                                         through the development of large language models (LLMs) [2–4]. These models demonstrate impres-
                                         sive performance on static medical question answering benchmarks like MedQA [5], PubMedQA [6],
                                         and MedMCQA [7], even rivaling human experts. However, a significant gap remains between LLMs
                                         performance on these benchmarks and their real-world application in clinical diagnosis.
                                         In practice, patients frequently lack sufficient medical knowledge and may possess ambiguous under-
                                         standings of various medical concepts, making it difficult for them to accurately and comprehensively
                                         communicate their physical condition to healthcare providers in a single interaction [8]. As a result,
                                         patients often exhibit a strong dependence on doctors for guidance and clarification. Doctors assume
                                         a leading role in the complex, multi-turn interactions with patients to gather the information required
                                         for accurate diagnosis and treatment [9, 10]. Despite the crucial importance of this dynamic, patient-
                                         centered diagnostic process, there is a scarcity of research assessing the ability of large language
                                         models (LLMs) to simulate this interaction.
                                         To address above challenges, we introduce AI Hospital, a LLM-powered multi-agent framework
                                         that simulates real-world dynamic medical interactions. AI Hospital consists of multiple non-player
                                         characters (NPCs), including Patient, Examiner, and Chief Physician, as well as the player character,
                                         represented by the Doctor. It recreates the scenario of a Patient visit, requiring Doctor to engage in
                                             ∗
                                                 Corresponding author. Email: lemuria_chen@hust.edu.cn


                                         Preprint. Under review.
         Player: Doctor                    NPC: Patient                        NPC: Examiner                      NPC: Chief Physician
                                           Subjective Information              Objective Information              Diagnosis and Treatment


       May I ask where you are feeling                  <Speak to Examiner> The doctor                 Please summarize your diagnosis.
       unwell?                                          suggested I get a brain MRI. What              # Symptoms
                                                        tests do I need to do?                         Unsteady walking, muscle weakness.
       <Speak to Doctor> In the past six
       months, I've started to feel unsteady                                                           # Auxiliary Examinations
                                                        Understood.
       while walking.                                                                                  xxx
                                                        # Medical Examination Items                    # Diagnostic Results
       Have you felt any muscle weakness                - Brain Magnetic Resonance                     Multiple System Atrophy (MSA).
       or muscle atrophy?                               Imaging (MRI): Reduced volume of               # Diagnostic Rationales
                                                        the pons, brain atrophy                        xxx
       <Speak to Doctor> Yes. Sometimes I                                                              # Treatment Plan
       also feel muscle cramps in my legs.               Based on your symptoms and MRI                xxx
                                                         results, you might have Multiple
       Understood. Have you experienced                  System Atrophy (MSA).                         # Symptoms
       any blurred vision or double vision?              The MRI results showing reduced               Rank: 3
                                                                                                       # Auxiliary Examinations
       <Speak to Doctor> I experience                    volume of the pons and brain
                                                                                                       Rank: 4
       blurred vision when looking at                    atrophy are also typical                      # Diagnostic Results
       things up close.                                  manifestations of MSA.                        Rank: 4
                                                         Treatment plan: For your motor                # Diagnostic Rationales
       Alright. I suggest you get a brain                function impairment, you could                Rank: 3
       MRI. Can you get this test done and               consider using anti-Parkinson’s               # Treatment Plan
       tell me the results?                              medication like Levodopa; …                   Rank: 3

       Doctor-Patient Communication                      Obtaining Medical Examination                 Evaluating the Accuracy of the
       about the Condition                               Outcomes                                      Diagnosis


                              Figure 1: The demonstration of AI Hospital framework.


multi-turn conversations with Patient, ask relevant and probing questions, recommend appropriate
medical examinations, and make diagnoses after collecting enough information. We set up Examiner
in the NPCs, who are specifically tasked with interacting with Patient and providing pertinent medical
examination results, ensuring that Doctor have access to the necessary objective information of the
Patient to make accurate diagnoses. Additionally, Chief Physician is responsible for evaluating the
performance of Doctor after the entire session. The multi-agent nature of the AI Hospital framework
allows for realistic simulations of complex medical scenarios, enabling a comprehensive assessment
of an LLMs’ ability to navigate various clinical situations.
Based on the AI Hospital framework, we investigate the feasibility of utilizing LLMs as Doctors
for clinical diagnosis by establishing the Multi-View Medical Evaluation (MVME) benchmark.
This benchmark incorporates a collection of high-quality Chinese medical records meticulously
screened by experienced medical professionals. These real-world cases provide detailed structured
medical profiles, including patient subjective conditions, objective medical test results, diagnoses
and treatments. Leveraging GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to simulate the AI Hospital’s non-player characters
(NPCs), we conduct a thorough evaluation of the performance of LLMs-driven Doctors within
this dynamic and realistic medical interaction environment. The MVME benchmark evaluates the
performance of Doctor along three key dimensions by Chief Physician: the ability to collect symptoms,
recommend examinations, and make diagnoses. As a supplement, we also develop a link-based
approach that integrates medical standard knowledge to generate entity-level evaluation metrics.
To enhance LLMs’ diagnostic accuracy, drawing on previous research [11, 12] that highlights the
importance of teamwork in clinical diagnosis, we delve into the collaborative mechanism [13, 14],
facilitating iterative discussions among doctors. We utilize multiple Doctors to independently engage
with the same medical record, allowing for diverse conversation trajectories and diagnostic outcomes.
A dispute resolution strategy is proposed that effectively engages a Centre Agent to guide discussions,
clarify issues, and steer the Doctors towards a more structured and efficient collaboration, thereby
fostering more focused discussions and accelerating the achievement of consensus.
To assess the performance of LLMs in clinical diagnosis, we conduct extensive experiments within
the AI Hospital framework. We first validate the reliability of the various roles in AI Hospital and
then evaluate a range of LLMs in the interactive diagnostic process. Our results reveal a substantial
performance gap between interactive LLMs and the one-step GPT-4, which serves as an upper
bound by directly utilizing all patient information in a single interaction. On key metrics such
as the accuracy of diagnostic results, diagnostic rationales, and treatment plans, the performance
of interactive LLMs is less than 50% of that achieved by the one-step GPT-4. Despite dedicated


                                                                     2
prompting engineering, LLMs struggle to make reasonable decisions in multi-turn interactions,
leading to suboptimal diagnostic accuracy. The dispute resolution collaborative mechanism enhances
performance to a certain degree but also falls short of the upper bound. It’s suggested that existing
LLMs may not have fully assimilated effective multi-turn diagnostic strategies. Our quantitative
results highlights the challenges existing LLMs face in posing pertinent questions, eliciting crucial
symptoms, and recommending appropriate medical examinations. These findings underscore
the difficulties encountered by current LLMs in replicating the complex clinical reasoning processes
employed by professional doctors and emphasize the need for further research to bridge the gap
between LLMs and human physicians in clinical diagnosis.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1) We introduce
AI Hospital, a novel LLM-powered multi-agent framework to simulate medical interactions, enabling
comprehensive evaluation of LLMs’ ability to navigate complex clinical scenarios; 2) We establish
the Multi-View Medical Evaluation (MVME) benchmark, which leverages high-quality medical
records to evaluate the performance of LLMs-driven doctors in collecting symptoms, recommending
examinations, and making diagnoses; 3) We propose a dispute resolution collaborative mechanism
that facilitates iterative discussions among doctors to enhance diagnostic accuracy. The potential of
our AI Hospital framework is comprehensively discussed in Appendix H.

2     Setup of AI Hospital
As depicted in Figure 1, the AI Hospital framework comprises three NPC characters — the Patient,
Examiner, and Chief Physician — and one player character, the Doctor. Each character assumes
specific roles and responsibilities within the framework. The AI Hospital operates in two phases. In
the diagnostic phase, Patient, Examiner, and Doctor engage in conversations to exchange information
necessary for accurate diagnosis. The number of interaction turns in this phase can vary depending
on the Doctor’s diagnostic strategy. Subsequently, during the evaluation phase, Chief Physician is
responsible for scoring the performance of Doctor in the diagnostic phase. The following sections
will elaborate on the settings and construction methods for each agent in AI Hospital.

2.1   Agents Setup with Medical Records

Medical records are a valuable resource for reconstructing the hospital visit experience and simulating
real-world medical interactions. By leveraging these records, we can reverse-engineer the diagnostic
process and shape the behavior of agents within the AI Hospital framework. We categorize the
information in each medical record into three types: 1) Subjective Information This category
includes the patient’s symptoms, etiology, past medical history, habits, etc., which are primarily
provided by the patient during their verbal interactions with the doctor; 2) Objective Information
This category encompasses medical test reports such as complete blood counts, urinalysis, and chest
X-rays. The presence of these data in medical records indicates that the patient underwent these tests
during the diagnostic process at the doctor’s recommendation; 3) Diagnosis and Treatment This
category consists of diagnostic results, diagnostic rationales, and treatment courses, which are the
final conclusions made by the doctor during the diagnostic process, based on the combination of
subjective and objective information.
These categories of information are assigned to the corresponding agents in the AI Hospital framework.
Patient has access to the subjective information, Examiner is aware of the objective information, and
Chief Physician possess all information, while Doctor do not have access to any information. AI
Hospital framework assigns specific categories of information from medical records to each agent,
shaping their scope of information within the diagnostic process.

2.2   Agent Behavior Setting for NPCs

In the AI Hospital framework, we leverage GPT-3.5 to power Patient and Examiner, and GPT-4 to
drive Chief Physician, enabling them to embody their roles authentically. Beyond providing NPCs
with relevant information in medical records, we also employ meticulous prompt engineering to
encourage they exhibit realistic behavior patterns.
Patient The Patient agent is designed to exhibit a set of realistic behavior patterns to enhance
the authenticity of the medical simulation: 1) Cooperation. The agent should actively respond to


                                                  3
the doctor’s inquiries and provide truthful answers, even if they may not proactively disclose all
relevant information. The agent should actively participate in medical examinations recommended by
the doctor; (2) Communication. The agent should use colloquial language and may omit certain
important details or have subjective biases in describing their condition due to limited medical
knowledge or personal beliefs; 3) Curiosity. The agent should express concerns or questions based
on their level of understanding, seeking clear explanations from the doctor to address their doubts
about the diagnosis or treatment process; 4) Personalisation. For each medical record, we employ
GPT-4 to reason and imagine the patient’s unique background, experiences, emotional responses, and
personality traits, thereby enhancing the realism and depth of the simulation. The prompt for Patient
agent is shown in Table 9.
Examiner The Examiner agent’s primary goal is to provide relevant examination results when
the Patient agent requests a query for a specific medical test. To maintain the authenticity of the
simulation, the agent follows a realistic workflow. Upon receiving an examination query, the agent
first identifies the requested medical examination and rejects any ambiguous or unclear requests. If
the corresponding medical examination results are available, the Examiner agent returns the relevant
findings to the doctor. In cases where no specific results are found, the agent reports no abnormalities.
The Prompts are shown in Table 10 and 11.
Chief Physician The primary responsibility of the Chief Physician agent is to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the Doctor agent in interactive diagnosis. After the diagnostic phase, Chief Physician first
requires the Doctor to provide a comprehensive summary report for the patient, and then evaluates
the summary report by comparing it with raw medical record, which serves as the gold standard. The
prompts for Chief Physician agent and more detailed description of the evaluation process can be
found in Table 13 and § 3 respectively.


2.3   Agent Behavior Setting for Player

The player agent, i.e., the Doctor, can be powered by various LLMs that are being evaluated. However,
in order to be able to engage in conversations based on predefined settings, LLMs are required to be
well instruction-followed, otherwise LLMs will struggle to interact in AI Hospital.
Doctor The Doctor agent is designed to emulate the essential qualities and duties of a skilled and
empathetic physician in real-world practice. The agent is encouraged to actively gather information,
focusing on obtaining the patient’s physical conditions like symptoms and medical history. When
the agent determines that additional objective data is necessary to arrive at a confident diagnosis
or to confirm a suspected condition, it suggests relevant examinations and tests. By synthesizing
both subjective and objective findings, the agent aims to accurately diagnose the patient’s condition,
mirroring the systematic approach used by experienced doctors. The prompt of intern doctor is shown
in Table 15.


2.4   Dialogue Flow in AI Hospital

The AI Hospital framework simulates a realistic diagnostic process through a structured dialogue flow
involving multiple agents. The conversation is initiated by the Patient agent, who presents a chief
complaint generated by GPT-4 based on the patient’s medical record. The Doctor agent then engages
in a series of interactions with the Patient and Examiner agents to gather necessary information
and make an accurate diagnosis. Throughout the dialogue, each agent’s responses are prefixed with
special symbols to explicitly indicate the intended recipient of their message, enabling a seamless
multi-party conversation flow. The dialogue continues until the Doctor agent reaches a diagnosis or a
predefined maximum number of interaction rounds is reached. For a more detailed description of the
dialogue flow, please refer to Appendix A.


3     MVME: Evaluation of LLMs as Intern Doctors for Clinical Diagnosis

Based on AI Hospital, we assess the feasibility of employing LLMs as Doctor agent for clinical
diagnosis by establishing the Multi-View Medical Evaluation (MVME) benchmark.


                                                   4
3.1        Multi-View Evaluation Criteria

Evaluating the performance of the Doctor agent is a crucial component of the AI Hospital framework.
As mentioned in § 2.2, in the evaluation phase, the Doctor is required to provide a comprehensive
summary report of the Patient. We require the summary report consists of 5 parts, including the
patient’s symptoms, medical examinations, diagnostic results, diagnostic rationales, and treatment
plan.
Since the contents of the patient’s medical record are described using natural language, the Chief
Physician, as the evaluator, will directly compare each part of the report with the patient’s complete
medical record. For each part of the summary report, the GPT-4-driven Chief Physician needs to
score from four discrete scores: 1, 2, 3, and 4, representing poorest to excellent performance. The
evaluation of the "symptoms" part can reflect the comprehensiveness of the symptoms collected by
the Doctor during the interaction process. The evaluation of the "medical examinations results" part
can reflect the appropriateness of the medical examinations suggested by the Doctor. The evaluation
of the other parts can reflect the Doctor’s diagnostic and treatment capabilities. These metrics can
reflect the LLMs’ both dynamic and static medical decision-making abilities, including proactive
inquiry, information gathering, clinical knowledge and comprehensive judgment.
In addition to the above model-based evaluation method, we also compute entity-overlap-based
automated metrics for the diagnostic results part. We extract all disease entities from the diagnostic
results provided by the LLMs and the actual medical records, and link them to their corresponding
standardized disease entities. We then calculate the entity overlap to measure the accuracy of the
final diagnoses made by the LLMs. We report the average number of extracted disease entities (#),
set-level precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score (F) metrics. Currently, we only calculate entity-level
metrics for diseases because readily available entity linking methods and standards, such as the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) [15], exist for this purpose. For symptoms and
examinations, linking them to corresponding entities is more challenging due to the lack of readily
available tools. Therefore, we do not incorporate their entity-level metrics in this paper.

3.2        MVME Dataset Construction

We collect Chinese medical records across diverse depart-
ments online 2 and engage professional physicians for a         Table 1: Departments distribution.
thorough review. Subsequent to the exclusion of records
with deficiencies, such as incomplete information, a to-                 Department               #
tal of 506 cases remained. The detailed distribution of
these cases among the various departments is presented in                  Surgery              180
Table 1.                                                             Internal Medicine          153
                                                                 Obstetrics and Gynecology       94
To verify the quality of the collected medical records, we                Pediatrics             29
select samples from 10 secondary departments, randomly             Otorhinolaryngology          23
choosing five cases per department for review. Doctors                     Others                27
from corresponding departments are hired to evaluate the
“Diagnosis and Treatment” including diagnostic results,
diagnostic rationales, and treatment course with a binary choice: either “fundamentally correct” or
“obviously incorrect”. If three sections of a medical record are fundamentally accurate, then we
consider the medical record to be correct. Overall, expert validation conclude that 94% of the records
are deemed as correct.


4         Collaborative Diagnosis of LLMs Focused on Dispute Resolution

To further improve diagnostic accuracy, we propose a collaborative mechanism for clinical diagnosis
that leverages the power of multiple LLMs. In our collaborative framework, we employ different
LLMs to serve as individual Doctors, each engaging in interactive consultations with the Patient. Due
to the inherent differences among LLMs, these interactions may result in diverse dialogue trajectories
and diagnostic reports. To streamline the process of forming a unified diagnostic report, we introduce

      2
          https://bingli.iiyi.com/


                                                   5
a Central Agent, also referred to as the Chief Physician, to participate as a moderator. The overall
process is shown in Figure 4.
The Chief Physician consolidates and analyzes the data collected from Doctors, confirms disputed
points with Patient and Examiner, and synthesizes a comprehensive summary of the patient’s
condition. Through multiple discussion iterations, the Chief Physician identifies key points of
disagreement among Doctors and guides them to engage in targeted discussions, progressively
refining their understanding and working towards a consensus. This collaborative mechanism
harnesses the collective intelligence of LLMs to enhance the accuracy and robustness of clinical
diagnosis by capitalizing on their diverse knowledge and reasoning capabilities while promoting a
structured and iterative process of refining diagnostic reports. The overall process is delineated as
pseudocode in Algorithm 1, and the prompts are listed in Table 14 and Table 16 in the appendix.



5     Experiments

5.1   Agent Behavior Analysis in AI Hospital Framework

Before presenting the main results, it is crucial to verify whether the agents in the AI Hospital
framework effectively align with their intended roles and behaviors. We conduct a experiment to
investigate the behaviors of several key agents, including the Patient, Examiner, and Doctor.


Table 2: Human evaluation for agent behavior in AI Hospital. # represents the sample size, such as
number of total doctor-patient QA pairs in 50 dialogues.

                                       Patient                    Examiner        Doctor
                             #     Relevance Honesty         #      Accuracy    Consistency
            Qwen-Max       429      100.0%        99.0%      56       98.2%         99.0
            Wenxin-4.0     472      100.0%        98.1%      68       98.5%         99.0
            GPT-3.5        417      100.0%        99.5%      57       98.2%         98.0
            GPT-4          378      100.0%        99.7%      61      100.0%        100.0


Evaluation Metric For the Patient agent, we focus on two dimensions in the communication
between the patient and the doctor. The first dimension is the relevance of the patient’s responses
to the doctor’s questions. The second dimension is the honesty of the patient’s responses with
the subjective information in the medical record. For the Examiner agent, we assess the accuracy
of the agent’s understanding of the requested medical examination and its ability to return the
corresponding examination results when receiving a query for a medical examination. For the Doctor
agent, we evaluate the consistency of the doctor’s final diagnostic report with the information in the
dialogue flow. We categorize the consistency into three levels: 1) significantly inconsistent, 2) slightly
inconsistent, and 3) mostly consistent. These levels are assigned scores of 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Finally, we map this score to a range of 0-100. We document our evaluation methodology in detail in
Appendix F.
Experimental Setup We employ multiple Doctor agents, including GPT-3.5, GPT-4 [2], Wenxin-
4.0, and Qwen-Max [4]. We randomly select 50 medical record samples and ask each agent generate
50 multi-turn dialogue trajectories within the AI Hospital framework. We manually label all the
metrics and report the average values.
Results and Analysis Table 2 demonstrates the effectiveness of the AI Hospital framework in
simulating realistic medical interactions, with high scores (all over 95) across all metrics indicating
reliable and consistent agent behaviors. The Patient agent can provide accurate and pertinent
information, the Examiner agent can accurately understand and return requested medical examination
results, and the Doctor agent can generate consistent diagnostic reports. It validates the reliability
and effectiveness of the proposed multi-agent system, laying a solid foundation for assessing LLMs’
performance in clinical diagnosis.


                                                    6
Table 3: MVME: GPT-4 evaluation with reference in clinical consultation. GPT-4∗ in One-Step is the
upper bound. For GPT-4∗ , the ground truth of symptoms and medical examinations are provided,
resulting in a score of 100.0.

                                          Medical               Diagnostic       Diagnostic       Treatment
                          Symptoms
                                        Examinations             Results         Rationales          Plan
                                                                Interaction
  Baichuan (13B)         52.56 (2.77)    21.06 (2.83)           19.50 (2.74)     17.40 (2.51)    13.97 (2.37)
  HuatuoGPT-II (13B)     61.06 (2.17)    24.43 (2.50)           20.03 (2.56)     20.03 (2.37)    14.23 (2.18)
  HuatuoGPT-II (34B)     68.43 (1.83)    30.30 (2.77)           25.20 (2.52)     27.46 (2.55)    21.33 (2.37)
  GPT-3.5                66.39 (1.33)    31.03 (2.97)           23.90 (2.43)     24.43 (2.42)    17.73 (2.17)
  Wenxin-4.0             67.79 (1.33)    30.43 (2.70)           26.23 (2.63)     26.46 (2.57)    22.00 (2.43)
  Qwen-Max               61.69 (2.10)    26.60 (2.63)           26.46 (2.63)     28.76 (2.63)    24.90 (2.45)
  GPT-4                  69.03 (1.27)    25.10 (2.63)           29.36 (2.58)     30.76 (2.57)    26.93 (2.63)
                                                               Collaboration
  2 Doctors w/o DR       75.49 (2.03)    43.03 (3.03)           35.56 (2.83)     38.53 (2.76)    32.40 (2.60)
  2 Doctors              78.06 (1.83)    47.10 (2.97)           38.06 (2.72)     41.56 (2.75)    35.90 (2.62)
  3 Doctors              80.26 (1.80)    49.63 (2.83)           39.60 (2.80)     44.23 (2.77)    37.26 (2.63)
                                                                 One-Step
          ∗                         ∗               ∗
  GPT-4                     100.0          100.0               58.89 (1.63)      66.59 (1.33)    53.16 (1.83)


5.2   Can LLMs Diagnose Like Doctors?

In this section, we investigate the core question of this paper, i.e., can LLMs make diagnoses like
doctors? Based on the AI Hospital, We evaluate a range of LLMs, including GPT [2] (GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4), Wenxin-4.0, QWen-Max [4], Baichuan 13B, HuatuoGPT-II 13B and 34B [16]. Among
them, HuatuoGPT-II is designed specifically for the medical field. We only select HuatuoGPT-II
as the comparative model specifically because many medical LLMs have significantly lost their
instruction-following capabilities during the training process. This loss makes it difficult for these
models to adhere to our prompts and engage in meaningful dialogue, resulting in poor performance
on our benchmark.
Evaluation As mentioned in § 3.1, we employ the proposed multi-view evaluation criteria. We
normalize the scores of all metrics to a range between 0 and 100 and utilize the classic bootstrap
method [17] to compute the variance.
One-Step Diagnosis as Upper Bound In
the one-step diagnosis, we directly feed the pa- Table 4: MVME: Link-based evaluation of diag-
tient’s subjective information and objective in- nostic results.
formation described in § 2.1 as input to GPT-
4, prompting it to generate a diagnostic report
                                                                       #    R        P  F1
without going through the interactive diagnostic
phase. We consider the performance of GPT-4                                 Interaction
in this one-step setting as the upper bound of    Baichuan (13B)     1.58 10.21 23.79 14.28
LLM performance.                                  HuatuoGPT-II (13B) 1.72 12.76 24.84 16.85
                                                            HuatuoGPT-II (34B)    1.86   17.48   30.95   22.34
Interactive Diagnostic Performance of LLMs                  GPT-3.5               1.81   19.19   37.39   25.37
The main experimental results are presented in              Wenxin-4.0            2.50   22.03   31.44   25.91
Table 3 and Table 4. Our findings reveal several            Qwen-Max              1.77   22.42   43.38   29.56
key insights into the performance of existing               GPT-4                 1.52   21.64   50.26   30.26
LLMs in the AI Hospital framework. One of                                                Collaboration
notable observations is that the diagnostic per-            2 Doctors w/o DR      2.37   28.44   41.45   33.74
formance of existing LLMs in the AI Hospital                2 Doctors             2.41   29.51   43.62   35.21
framework falls significantly short of the up-              3 Doctors             3.20   36.54   39.58   38.00
per bound set by the one-step GPT-4 approach.                                              One-Step
Even GPT-4 achieves less than half of the upper             GPT-4∗                2.30   38.90   58.97   46.88
bound performance. This finding highlights the
substantial limitations of current LLMs in inter-


                                                        7
active settings, suggesting that they have not yet
learned sufficiently rich real-world clinical decision-making experiences. We also observe that LLMs
with less parameters tend to exhibit weaker interactive abilities, such as Baichuan (13B), demonstrates
lower performance in interactive diagnosis.
Gather Information Helps Diagnose Based on Table 3, we further explore the relationship between
the information finally collected and the quality of diagnosis. We use Symptoms and Medical Exami-
nations to measure the completeness of patient information, and use Diagnostic Results, Diagnostic
Rationales, and Treatment Plans to evaluate diagnostic quality. By using linear regression, we present
our results in Figure 5, which show that there is a significant positive correlation between more
complete patient information and higher diagnostic quality. This further explains the shortcomings
of current LLMs, namely that it is difficult for LLMs to collect patients’ symptoms through active
questioning like doctors, and it is even more difficult for them to recommend correct medical exami-
nations. This lack of dynamic clinical decision-making ability is a huge obstacle that prevents
LLMs from diagnosing like doctors. The details of Figure 5 can be found in Appendix C.


6     Further Analysis

6.1   Collaboration Mechanism

In Table 3, we also evaluate several models with different settings of the cooperation mechanism.
The comparative methods include Collaborative Diagnosis with 3 and 2 Agents, an 2 Agents without
Dispute Resolution. They are denoted as 3 Doctors, 2 Doctors and 2 Doctors w/o DR. The initial two
intern doctors are powered by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 for interactive consultation, while the last one is
using Wenxin-4.0.



                       400
                              325 330
                       300


                       200

                                                101                    105
                       100
                                           58                                54
                                                          18 21
                         0
                                 1              2           3            4
                                     2 Doctors w/o DR      2 Doctors

Figure 2: Statistical analysis of discussion rounds in collaborative frameworks with and without
“Dispute Resolution” mechanism.


Effectiveness Collaboration Mechanism We observed several key findings: 1) The collabora-
tive use of models can exceed the performance of GPT-4, thereby validating the efficacy of the
cooperative mechanism; 2) Collaboration among “3 Doctors” enhances diagnosis compared to “2
Doctors”, highlighting the benefits of more agents in cooperation; 3) The removal of the “Dispute
Resolution” mechanism from the “2 Doctors” reduces its effectiveness, emphasizing the significance
of establishing a better consensus.
Efficiency of Dispute Resolution in Collaboration For the “Dispute Resolution”, we continue to
check whether intern doctors can reach consensus more rapidly. In terms of efficiency, a comparative
analysis is conducted on the number of discussion rounds necessary to achieve consensus, both with
and without the “Dispute Resolution” mechanism. The outcomes are detailed in Figure 2. These
findings reveal a marked increase in the rate of consensus achieved within the initial four discussion
rounds following the adoption of the dispute resolution mechanism. This enhancement suggests
that the process, facilitated by the Chief Physician highlighting controversial issues and Doctors
concentrating on these discussions, effectively reduces the time required to achieve consensus.


                                                      8
6.2   Reasons for Failure Cases

We analyze an analysis on 219 cases where GPT-4 render incorrect diagnostic results, and rated
as 1 point by the Chief Physician. Through a systematic manual review, these errors are mainly
categorized into three distinct types, which are detailed in Table 5.
Omission of Auxiliary Examinations An il-
lustrative case involved the failure to detect gall- Table 5: Classification and statistics of misdiag-
bladder stones, attributed to the absence of a rec- noses (1 point) of the intern doctor powered by
ommended abdominal ultrasound. This category GPT-4.
highlights instances where GPT-4 did not sug-
gest essential auxiliary examinations that could                       Error Type                #
have potentially confirmed or ruled out possible
medical conditions.                                      Omission of auxiliary examinations 99
                                                          Exclusive focus on complications      52
Exclusive Focus on Complications In cer-                         Erroneous judgment             68
tain cases, GPT-4 focuses only the symptoms
given by the patient, such as soft tissue swelling
in the feet, while ignoring underlying complications, such as diabetes. This type of error arises from
the LLMs’ limited recognition of the interconnectedness between symptoms and underlying health
issues, and its failure to prompt further inquiry into the patient’s comprehensive health status.
Erroneous Judgment Even when presented with complete symptomatology and medical exami-
nation results, GPT-4 occasionally reach incorrect conclusions. This category of error points to a lack
of sufficient medical expertise embedded within the LLMs, leading to diagnostic inaccuracies even
with comprehensive data.


7     Related Works

LLM Powered Agents Before the popularity of LLMs, there are already efforts to create agents
in the medical field, particularly for medical education [18, 19]. However, these agents often lack
flexibility, relying on rule-based or traditional machine learning algorithms made it difficult to
accurately simulate the complexity of medical scenarios. The advancement of LLMs powered agents
has led to significant strides in complex task resolution through human-like actions, such as tool-
learning [20, 21], retrieval augmentation [22, 23], role-playing [24], communication [25, 26]. This
includes applications in software design and molecular dynamics simulation. Recent research [27] in
the medical field has highlighted the critical roles and decision-making processes in medical QA,
encompassing various investigations like CT scans, ultrasounds, electrocardiograms, and blood tests.
Despite these advancements, effectively integrating LLM-based agents into the medical domain,
particularly in disease diagnosis, presents a notable challenge [28]. Our research pioneers the use of
multi-agent systems in creating a clinical diagnosis environment. We introduce a novel mechanism
for identifying, discussing, and resolving disputes in collaboration, demonstrating promising results
in clinical diagnosis.
Medical Large Language Models Prior to the emergence of large language models (LLMs),
the majority of automated diagnostic methods [9, 10] relies on reinforcement learning to guide
agents in gathering symptoms and conducting diagnoses. The development of LLMs in the medical
domain has been driven by open-source Chinese LLMs and various fine-tuning methods. Mod-
els like Med-PaLM [29], DoctorGLM [30], BenTsao [31], ChatGLM-Med [32], Bianque-2 [33],
ChatMed-Consult [34], MedicalGPT [35], and DISC-MedLLM [36] fine-tune using different datasets,
techniques, and frameworks, focusing on medical question answering, health inquiries and doctor-
patient dialogues.
Evaluation in Medicine AI Prior research in medical AI evaluation has concentrated on non-
interactive tasks, including question answering, entity and relation extraction, and medical summariza-
tion and generation. In biomedical question answering, key datasets such as MedQA (USMLE) [5],
PubMedQA [6], and MedMCQA [7] are utilized, with accuracy serving as the primary evaluation
metric. The objective of entity and relation extraction [37] is to categorize named entities and
their relationships from unstructured text into specific predefined classes. Prominent biomedical
NER datasets include NCBI Disease [38], JNLPBA [39], BC5CDR [40], BioRED [41] and IMCS-
21 [42, 43], with the F1 score being the standard for model performance assessment. Medical


                                                  9
summarization and generation tasks involve converting structured data, like tables, into descriptive
text. This includes the creation of patient clinic letters, radiology reports, and medical notes [44].
The principal datasets for these tasks are PubMed [6] and MentSum [45]. A recent study introduced
BioLeaflets [46] and assessed multiple Large Language Models (LLMs) in data-to-text generation.

8   Conclusion
In AI Hospital, we take a step forward in the field of medical interactions by concentrating on
clinical diagnosis. We introduce AI Hospital to build a real-time interactive consultation scenario.
We generate simulated patients and examiner using collected medical records and established a
comprehensive engineering process. Based on the platform, we build a benchmark MVME to explore
the feasibility of different LLMs in interactive consultations. To improve the diagnostic accuracy,
this research also introduces a novel collaborative mechanism for intern doctors, featuring iterative
discussions and a dispute resolution process, supervised by a medical director. In our experiment,
the results not only demonstrate the performance of different LLMs but also confirm the efficacy
of our dispute resolution-centered collaborative approach. For in-depth analysis, we list the error
types and identify the issues that should be addressed. In the future, we will focus on building more
comprehensive benchmark, cost-effective evaluation framework, and optimizing the agents.

Limitations
The AI Hospital framework and MVME benchmark, while making significant strides in evaluating
the interactive performance of LLMs in clinical diagnosis, have several limitations. The use of
primarily Chinese medical records may limit generalizability to other languages and healthcare
systems. Although diverse, the sample size of 506 cases may not fully capture the complexity
of real-world scenarios, including rare diseases. Simulated interactions between agents may not
perfectly replicate human-to-human nuances, requiring further validation. The current treatment plan
evaluation system is insufficient, as it does not consider feasible alternative strategies, potentially
underestimating LLMs’ performance. Lastly, the extensive use of OpenAI’s LLM API may increase
the environmental burden, which could be mitigated by leveraging smaller, more efficient open-source
models in future studies. Despite these limitations, the AI Hospital framework and MVME benchmark
provide a solid foundation for future research on evaluating and improving LLMs’ clinical diagnostic
capabilities.

Ethics Consideration
Ethical considerations are of utmost importance in our research on the application of LLMs in clinical
diagnosis. We recognize the potential implications of our work and have taken steps to address them.
Firstly, to ensure transparency and reproducibility, we will release the publicly accessible online
medical records data used in our study. This allows other researchers to validate and build upon
our findings, promoting collaborative progress in this field. However, we acknowledge the critical
importance of privacy protection. The data sources have undergone a process of de-identification,
removing sensitive information before our collection. Furthermore, we recognize the potential for
bias in AI systems, which could perpetuate or amplify disparities in healthcare. To mitigate this risk,
we have made efforts to ensure the diversity and representativeness of our medical record datasets. .
By proactively addressing these considerations, we aim to realize the potential benefits of AI-assisted
diagnosis while ensuring its responsible and equitable implementation.

References
 [1] Junaid Bajwa, Usman Munir, Aditya Nori, and Bryan Williams. Artificial intelligence in
     healthcare: transforming the practice of medicine. Future healthcare journal, 8(2):e188, 2021.
 [2] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
 [3] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
     Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
     foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.


                                                  10
 [4] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
     Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
 [5] Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What
     disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from
     medical exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.
 [6] Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William W Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. Pubmedqa: A
     dataset for biomedical research question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06146, 2019.
 [7] Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Medmcqa: A large-scale
     multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Conference on
     Health, Inference, and Learning, pages 248–260. PMLR, 2022.
 [8] Ashley ND Meyer, Traber D Giardina, Lubna Khawaja, and Hardeep Singh. Patient and
     clinician experiences of uncertainty in the diagnostic process: current understanding and future
     directions. Patient Education and Counseling, 104(11):2606–2615, 2021.
 [9] Cheng Zhong, Kangenbei Liao, Wei Chen, Qianlong Liu, Baolin Peng, Xuanjing Huang, Jiajie
     Peng, and Zhongyu Wei. Hierarchical reinforcement learning for automatic disease diagnosis.
     Bioinformatics, 38(16):3995–4001, 2022.
[10] Wei Chen, Cheng Zhong, Jiajie Peng, and Zhongyu Wei. Dxformer: a decoupled automatic
     diagnostic system based on decoder–encoder transformer with dense symptom representations.
     Bioinformatics, 39(1):btac744, 2023.
[11] Peter Croft, Douglas G Altman, Jonathan J Deeks, Kate M Dunn, Alastair D Hay, Harry
     Hemingway, Linda LeResche, George Peat, Pablo Perel, Steffen E Petersen, et al. The science
     of clinical practice: disease diagnosis or patient prognosis? evidence about “what is likely to
     happen” should shape clinical practice. BMC medicine, 13(1):1–8, 2015.
[12] Robert M Centor, Rabih Geha, and Reza Manesh. The pursuit of diagnostic excellence. JAMA
     network open, 2(12):e1918040–e1918040, 2019.
[13] KJ O’leary, CD Ritter, H Wheeler, MK Szekendi, TS Brinton, and MV Williams. Teamwork on
     inpatient medical units: assessing attitudes and barriers. BMJ Quality & Safety, 19(2):117–121,
     2010.
[14] Benjamin W Lamb, Helen WL Wong, Charles Vincent, James SA Green, and Nick Sevdalis.
     Teamwork and team performance in multidisciplinary cancer teams: development and evaluation
     of an observational assessment tool. BMJ quality & safety, 20(10):849–856, 2011.
[15] PA Trott. International classification of diseases for oncology. Journal of clinical pathology,
     30(8):782, 1977.
[16] Junying Chen, Xidong Wang, Anningzhe Gao, Feng Jiang, Shunian Chen, Hongbo Zhang,
     Dingjie Song, Wenya Xie, Chuyi Kong, Jianquan Li, et al. Huatuogpt-ii, one-stage training for
     medical adaption of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09774, 2023.
[17] Bradley Efron. Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife. In Breakthroughs in statistics:
     Methodology and distribution, pages 569–593. Springer, 1992.
[18] Penni I Watts, Donna S McDermott, Guillaume Alinier, Matthew Charnetski, Jocelyn Ludlow,
     Elizabeth Horsley, Colleen Meakim, and Pooja A Nawathe. Healthcare simulation standards of
     best practicetm simulation design. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 58:14–21, 2021.
[19] Ryan Antel, Samira Abbasgholizadeh-Rahimi, Elena Guadagno, Jason M Harley, and Dan Poe-
     naru. The use of artificial intelligence and virtual reality in doctor-patient risk communication:
     A scoping review. Patient Education and Counseling, 105(10):3038–3050, 2022.
[20] Wei Chen, Qiushi Wang, Zefei Long, Xianyin Zhang, Zhongtian Lu, Bingxuan Li, Siyuan Wang,
     Jiarong Xu, Xiang Bai, Xuanjing Huang, et al. Disc-finllm: A chinese financial large language
     model based on multiple experts fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15205, 2023.


                                                 11
[21] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
     Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
     teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

[22] Shengbin Yue, Wei Chen, Siyuan Wang, Bingxuan Li, Chenchen Shen, Shujun Liu, Yuxuan
     Zhou, Yao Xiao, Song Yun, Wei Lin, et al. Disc-lawllm: Fine-tuning large language models for
     intelligent legal services. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11325, 2023.

[23] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning
     to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511,
     2023.

[24] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
     Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceed-
     ings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages
     1–22, 2023.

[25] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang,
     Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model
     based agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.

[26] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen,
     Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous
     agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023.

[27] Xiangru Tang, Anni Zou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yilun Zhao, Xingyao Zhang, Arman Cohan, and
     Mark Gerstein. Medagents: Large language models as collaborators for zero-shot medical
     reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10537, 2023.

[28] Hongjian Zhou, Boyang Gu, Xinyu Zou, Yiru Li, Sam S Chen, Peilin Zhou, Junling Liu, Yining
     Hua, Chengfeng Mao, Xian Wu, et al. A survey of large language models in medicine: Progress,
     application, and challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05112, 2023.

[29] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung,
     Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models
     encode clinical knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138, 2022.

[30] Honglin Xiong, Sheng Wang, Yitao Zhu, Zihao Zhao, Yuxiao Liu, Qian Wang, and Dinggang
     Shen. Doctorglm: Fine-tuning your chinese doctor is not a herculean task. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2304.01097, 2023.

[31] Haochun Wang, Chi Liu, Nuwa Xi, Zewen Qiang, Sendong Zhao, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu.
     Huatuo: Tuning llama model with chinese medical knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06975,
     2023.

[32] Haochun Wang, Chi Liu, Sendong Zhao, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. chatglm-med: 基于中文医
     学知识的chatglm模型微调. https://github.com/SCIR-HI/Med-ChatGLM, 2023.

[33] Yirong Chen, Zhenyu Wang, Xiaofen Xing, Huimin Zheng, Zhipei Xu, Kai Fang, Junhong
     Wang, Sihang Li, Jieling Wu, Qi Liu, and Xiangmin Xu. Bianque: Balancing the questioning
     and suggestion ability of health llms with multi-turn health conversations polished by chatgpt.
     Github, 2023.

[34] Wei Zhu and Xiaoling Wang. Chatmed: A chinese medical large language model. https:
     //github.com/michael-wzhu/ChatMed, 2023.

[35] Ming Xu. Medicalgpt: Training medical gpt model. https://github.com/shibing624/
     MedicalGPT, 2023.

[36] Zhijie Bao, Wei Chen, Shengze Xiao, Kuang Ren, Jiaao Wu, Cheng Zhong, Jiajie Peng,
     Xuanjing Huang, and Zhongyu Wei. Disc-medllm: Bridging general large language models and
     real-world medical consultation, 2023.


                                                12
[37] Jing Li, Aixin Sun, Jianglei Han, and Chenliang Li. A survey on deep learning for named entity
     recognition. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34(1):50–70, 2020.
[38] Rezarta Islamaj Doğan, Robert Leaman, and Zhiyong Lu. Ncbi disease corpus: a resource
     for disease name recognition and concept normalization. Journal of biomedical informatics,
     47:1–10, 2014.
[39] Nigel Collier and Jin-Dong Kim. Introduction to the bio-entity recognition task at jnlpba. In Pro-
     ceedings of the International Joint Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine
     and its Applications (NLPBA/BioNLP), pages 73–78, 2004.
[40] Jiao Li, Yueping Sun, Robin J Johnson, Daniela Sciaky, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Robert Leaman,
     Allan Peter Davis, Carolyn J Mattingly, Thomas C Wiegers, and Zhiyong Lu. Biocreative v cdr
     task corpus: a resource for chemical disease relation extraction. Database, 2016, 2016.
[41] Ling Luo, Po-Ting Lai, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Cecilia N Arighi, and Zhiyong Lu. Biored: a rich
     biomedical relation extraction dataset. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 23(5):bbac282, 2022.
[42] Wei Chen, Zhiwei Li, Hongyi Fang, Qianyuan Yao, Cheng Zhong, Jianye Hao, Qi Zhang, Xuan-
     jing Huang, Jiajie Peng, and Zhongyu Wei. A benchmark for automatic medical consultation
     system: frameworks, tasks and datasets. Bioinformatics, 39(1):btac817, 2023.
[43] Wei Chen, Shiqi Wei, Zhongyu Wei, and Xuan-Jing Huang. Knse: A knowledge-aware natural
     language inference framework for dialogue symptom status recognition. In Findings of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 10278–10286, 2023.
[44] Jialin Liu, Changyu Wang, and Siru Liu. Utility of chatgpt in clinical practice. Journal of
     Medical Internet Research, 25:e48568, 2023.
[45] Sajad Sotudeh, Nazli Goharian, and Zachary Young. Mentsum: A resource for exploring
     summarization of mental health online posts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00856, 2022.
[46] Ruslan Yermakov, Nicholas Drago, and Angelo Ziletti. Biomedical data-to-text generation via
     fine-tuning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01518, 2021.


Appendix

A    Detailed Description of the Dialogue Flow in AI Hospital
This section is the detailed description of the dialogue flow in AI Hospital in §2.4. The AI Hospital
framework aims to simulate a realistic diagnostic process by orchestrating a structured dialogue flow
involving multiple agents, namely the Doctor, Patient, and Examiner. This appendix provides a
comprehensive description of the dialogue flow, detailing the initiation, progression, and termination
phases.

Dialogue Initiation The dialogue commences with the Patient agent generating a chief complaint
based on the information contained in their medical record. To create this initial complaint, GPT-4 is
employed to analyze the patient’s medical record and generate a concise statement that encapsulates
the patient’s recent physical condition. The generated complaint is designed to align with the
predefined persona of the patient, accurately reflecting their language style and focusing on a relevant
subset of the subjective information available in the medical record. This chief complaint serves as
the starting point for the first round of dialogue between the Patient and Doctor agents.

Dialogue Progression The diagnostic process unfolds through a series of interactions between
the Doctor, Patient, and Examiner agents. The Doctor agent assumes an active role in this phase,
engaging in a comprehensive inquiry to elicit detailed information about the patient’s condition.
This involves asking pertinent questions and recommending appropriate medical examinations to
gather the necessary data for formulating an accurate diagnosis. The Patient agent, serving as a
non-player character (NPC), autonomously determines its course of action at each dialogue turn based
on meticulously designed prompts. When communicating with the Doctor agent, the Patient agent


                                                  13
 <对医生讲> 最近半年我走路开始不太稳当，有点像喝醉酒似的。最                                                    # 症状
 近三个月，我说话开始不清楚，有时候站着会感到头晕，但是坐下或                                                     (1)走路不稳，说话不清楚，头晕，尤其是站立时
 者躺下就会好一些。我还有点尿频尿急的问题，前段时间因为这个做                                                     (2)肌肉无力，尤其是走路时，有时会感到腿部肌肉抽筋
 了前列腺手术。                                                                            (3)视力模糊，尤其是近距离看东西时
 <Speak to Doctor> In the past six months, I've started to feel unsteady            # 辅助检查
 while walking, a bit like I'm drunk. In the past three months, my speech           (1)头部磁共振: 脑桥体积欠丰满
 has become unclear, and sometimes I feel dizzy when standing up, but it            (2)头部磁共振: 脑萎缩
 gets better when I sit or lie down. I also have issues with frequent and           # 诊断结果
 urgent urination, and I had prostate surgery because of this recently.             多系统萎缩（MSA）
                                                                                    #诊断依据#
 我明白了，你的情况需要我们进一步了解。你有没有感觉到肌肉无力                                                     (1)症状：自主神经功能障碍（尿频尿急）、运动功能障碍（走路不稳、
 或者肌肉萎缩的情况？                                                                             肌肉无力）和脑干功能障碍（说话不清楚、头晕）
 I understand, your condition requires further investigation. Have you felt         (2)辅助检查：MRI检查结果显示的脑桥体积欠丰满和脑萎缩
 any muscle weakness or muscle atrophy?                                             # 治疗方案
                                                                                    (1)对症处理：使用抗帕金森病药物如左旋多巴改善运动功能障碍，使用
 <对医生讲> 是的，我感觉到了肌肉无力，尤其是在走路的时候。有                                                        抗胆碱药物改善尿频尿急，使用晕动症药物改善头晕
 时候还会感觉到腿部肌肉有些抽筋的感觉。至于肌肉萎缩，我没有特                                                     (2)物理治疗：进行平衡训练和力量训练，以改善运动功能
 别注意到。                                                                              # Symptoms
 <Speak to Doctor> Yes, I have felt muscle weakness, especially when                (1) Unsteady walking, unclear speech, dizziness, especially when standing.
 walking. Sometimes I also feel muscle cramps in my legs. As for muscle             (2) Muscle weakness, particularly noticeable while walking, accompanied by
 atrophy, I haven't particularly noticed.                                           leg muscle cramps.
                                                                                    (3) Blurred vision, particularly for close objects.
 了解了，你有没有出现过视力模糊或者双视的情况？                                                            # Auxiliary Examinations
 Understood. Have you experienced any blurred vision or double vision?              (1) Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): Reduced volume of the pons.
                                                                                    (2) Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): Brain atrophy.
 <对医生讲> 我有时候会出现视力模糊的情况，尤其是在近距离看东                                                    # Diagnostic Results
 西的时候。但是没有出现过双视的情况。                                                                 Multiple System Atrophy (MSA).
 <Speak to Doctor> Sometimes I experience blurred vision, especially when           # Diagnostic Rationales
 looking at things up close. But I have not experienced double vision.              (1) Symptoms: Nervous dysfunction (frequent and urgent urination) and motor
                                                                                        function impairment (unsteady walking, muscle weakness).
 好的，了解了。为了更准确地了解你的病情，我建议你做一个脑部的
                                                                                    (2) (2) Auxiliary Examinations: MRI results showing reduced volume of the
 MRI检查，这样可以帮助我们更好地了解你的病情。你可以去做这个
                                                                                        pons and brain atrophy.
 检查，然后把结果告诉我吗？
                                                                                    # Treatment Plan
 Alright, understood. To better understand your condition, I suggest you get
                                                                                    (1) Symptomatic treatment: Use of anti-Parkinson's medication such as
 a brain MRI. This can help us understand your condition better. Can you
                                                                                        Levodopa to improve motor function impairment, anticholinergic drugs to
 get this test done and tell me the results?
                                                                                        manage frequent and urgent urination, and anti-motion sickness drugs for
                                                                                        dizziness.
 <对检查员讲> 您好，医生建议我做一个脑部的MRI检查，请问我需要
                                                                                    (2) Physical therapy: Engage in balance training and strength training to
 做哪些检查？检查结果能否告诉我？谢谢!
                                                                                        improve motor functions.
 <Speak to Examiner> Hello, the doctor suggested I get a brain MRI. What
 tests do I need to do? Can you tell me the results? Thank you!                     # 诊断结果
                                                                                    分析：实习医生的诊断结果为多系统萎缩（MSA），与专家的诊断结果。
 # 检查项目
                                                                                    选项：A
 - 头部磁共振（MRI）: 脑桥体积欠丰满，脑萎缩
                                                                                    # 治疗方案
 # Medical Examination Items
                                                                                    分析：实习医生的诊断依据包括自主神经功能障碍、运动功能障碍和脑干
 - Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): Reduced volume of the pons,
                                                                                    功能障碍的症状，以及MRI检查结果显示的脑桥体积欠丰满和脑萎缩。这
 brain atrophy
                                                                                    与专家的诊断依据相当一致，专家的诊断依据还包括了腔隙性脑梗死的发
 根据你的症状和MRI检查结果，你可能患有多系统萎缩（MSA）。这是                                                  现，但这一点在实习医生的诊断依据中未提及。尽管存在这一差异，实习
 一种罕见的神经系统疾病，主要表现为自主神经功能障碍（如你的尿                                                     医生的诊断依据仍然涵盖了多系统萎缩的主要特征。
 频尿急）、运动功能障碍（如你的走路不稳、肌肉无力）和脑干功能                                                     选项：B
 障碍（如你的说话不清楚、头晕）。MRI检查结果显示的脑桥体积欠                                                    # 治疗方案
 丰满和脑萎缩也是多系统萎缩的典型表现。                                                                分析：实习医生的治疗方案包括对症处理、物理治疗和定期复查。对症处
 治疗方案：目前多系统萎缩没有特效药，治疗主要是对症处理。对于                                                     理中提到使用抗帕金森病药物如左旋多巴、抗胆碱药物和晕动症药物，这
 你的运动功能障碍，可以考虑使用抗帕金森病药物如左旋多巴；对于                                                     与专家的治疗方案中的改善微循环、营养神经、改善脑代谢等治疗原则不
 你的自主神经功能障碍，可以考虑使用药物调节，如尿频尿急可以使                                                     完全一致。专家的治疗方案更具体，包括了具体药物的名称和用法用量。
 用抗胆碱药物；对于你的脑干功能障碍，可以考虑使用药物调节，如                                                     实习医生的治疗方案虽然提到了对症处理和物理治疗，但缺乏专家方案中
 头晕可以使用晕动症药物。同时，建议你进行物理治疗，如平衡训练                                                     的具体药物治疗，因此只能说是相当部分一致。
 和力量训练，以改善你的运动功能。同时，定期复查，监控病情的变                                                     选项：B
 化。                                                                                 # Diagnosis Result
 Based on your symptoms and MRI results, you might have Multiple                    Analysis: The diagnosis of Multiple System Atrophy (MSA) made by the intern
 System Atrophy (MSA). This is a rare neurological disorder, primarily              is consistent with the expert's diagnosis of "Multiple System Atrophy."
 characterized by autonomic nervous dysfunction (like your frequent and             Option: A
 urgent urination), motor function impairment (like your unsteady walking,          # Treatment Plan
 muscle weakness), and brainstem dysfunction (like your unclear speech,             Analysis: The intern's basis for diagnosis includes symptoms of autonomic
 dizziness). The MRI results showing reduced volume of the pons and brain           nervous dysfunction, motor function impairment, and brainstem dysfunction,
 atrophy are also typical manifestations of MSA.                                    along with MRI results showing reduced volume of the pons and brain atrophy.
 Treatment plan: Currently, there is no specific cure for MSA, and treatment        This is largely consistent with the expert's diagnostic basis, which also includes
 mainly involves symptomatic management. For your motor function                    the finding of lacunar stroke, though this was not mentioned by the intern.
 impairment, you could consider using anti-Parkinson's medication like              Despite this difference, the intern's diagnostic basis still covers the main
 Levodopa; for your autonomic nervous dysfunction, medication adjustment            characteristics of MSA.
 might be considered, like anticholinergic drugs for frequent and urgent            Option: B
 urination; for your brainstem dysfunction, medication like anti-motion             # Treatment Plan
 sickness drugs might be used for dizziness. Additionally, physical therapy         Analysis: The intern's treatment plan includes symptomatic treatment, physical
 is suggested, such as balance training and strength training, to improve           therapy, and regular check-ups. The symptomatic treatment mentions the use of
 your motor functions. Also, regular follow-ups are recommended to                  anti-Parkinson's drugs such as Levodopa, anticholinergic drugs, and anti-motion
 monitor changes in your condition.                                                 sickness drugs, which do not fully align with the expert's treatment principles of
                                                                                    improving microcirculation, nourishing nerves, and enhancing brain
 您能分别总结病人的症状和辅助检查的结果，给出您的诊断结果、诊                                                     metabolism. The expert's treatment plan is more specific, including names and
 断依据和治疗方案吗？                                                                         dosages of specific drugs. Although the intern's plan mentions symptomatic
 Could you please summarize the patient‘s symptoms and the results of the           treatment and physical therapy, it lacks the specific medication treatment found
 auxiliary examinations, and then provide your diagnostic results,                  in the expert's plan, therefore it is only partially consistent.
 diagnostic rationales, and the treatment plan?                                     Option: B


Figure 3: An example of dialogue flow among Doctor, Patient, Examiner and Chief Physician in AI
Hospital framework.



prefaces its responses with the designated characters "<Speak to Doctor>". In these interactions, the
Patient agent provides answers to the doctor’s inquiries and offers feedback on their physical condition.
Conversely, when the Patient agent needs to request examinations based on the doctor’s instructions,
it initiates communication with the Examiner agent using the prefix "<Speak to Examiner>". The


                                                                               14
Patient agent conveys the requested examination items to the Examiner agent, who subsequently
reports the corresponding examination results back to the Doctor agent.

Dialogue Termination The termination conditions for the dialogue in the diagnostic phase are
clearly defined within the Patient agent’s prompt. The dialogue reaches its conclusion when either
of two conditions is satisfied. Firstly, if the Patient agent receives the doctor’s diagnostic results,
it generates the special termination token "<END>", signaling the end of the diagnostic phase.
Alternatively, the dialogue concludes when the predefined maximum number of interaction rounds
is surpassed. These termination conditions ensure a structured and finite dialogue flow, preventing
the diagnostic phase from continuing indefinitely. It is noteworthy that the number of rounds in the
evaluation phase is predetermined, rendering termination conditions relevant only for the diagnostic
phase.
By adhering to this well-defined dialogue flow, the AI Hospital framework enables a systematic and
realistic simulation of the diagnostic process, facilitating effective communication and information
exchange among the Doctor, Patient, and Examiner agents. This structured approach guarantees a
coherent and logical progression of the dialogue, ultimately leading to a comprehensive evaluation of
the Doctor agent’s performance. Figure 3 shows a specific dialogue flow example in the AI Hospital
framework.


B      Detail of Collaborative Algorithm

In this section, we delve into the details of our proposed multi-agent collaborative algorithm in
§ 4. In this process, the Central Agent, also called Chief Physician, does not exactly follow the
behavior pattern of the Chief Physician agent in AI Hospital framework mentioned in § 2.1. The
Central Agent is unaware of any information, whose goal is to coordinate multiple Doctor agents to
collaboratively improve diagnosis. Figure 5 shows an example flow of the collaboration process, and
the corresponding pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 1.

B.1      Exchange of Factual Information

We contend that a consensus on the physical condition of patients among Doctors constitutes the
cornerstone of collaborative diagnosis. The process of building the consensus is delineated into three
distinct steps, outlined below.

          • uring the interactive consultation process, Doctor agents communicate with the Central
            Agent, i.e., Chief Physician, relaying patient factual information they have acquired, focusing
            primarily on symptoms and medical test outcomes.


                              Symptoms: AA         Result: FF                Result: FJ
    Doctor A                  Examination: BB      Rationale:                Rationale:
                              Result: F1           (1) HH            …       (1) HK
                              Rationale: H1        Treatment Plan:           Treatment Plan:
                              Treatment Plan: I1   (1) II                    (1) LM


                                                                                                  Conclusion
                                                         Dispute
                              Symptoms:                                                        Result: FJ
                                                   (1) FF and FJ
   Chief                      (1) AA
                                                   (2) HH and HK     …            <End>
                                                                                               Rationale:
                                                                                               (1) HK
 Physician                    Examination:
                                                   (3) II and LL
                              (1) BB                                                           Treatment Plan:
                                                   (4) xx
                                                                                               (1) LM


                             Symptoms: AA          Result: FJ                Result: FJ
                             Examination: EE       Rationale:                Rationale:
    Doctor B
                             Result: F2            (1) HK            …       (1) HK
                             Rationale: H2         Treatment Plan:           Treatment Plan:
                             Treatment Plan: L1    (1) LL                    (1) LM

                           Exchange Information    1st Discussion    …       Nth Discussion


                        Figure 4: Collaboration of Doctors for clinical diagnosis.


                                                            15
       • The Chief Physician consolidates and analyzes the data collected from multiple Doctors,
         confirming symptoms and test outcomes with Patient and Examiner to clarify disputed
         points.
       • Drawing upon the findings received from Doctors, coupled with feedback from Patient and
         Examiner, the Chief Physician synthesizes a comprehensive summary of the symptoms and
         medical examination outcomes.

Algorithm 1 Dispute Resolution Collaboration
Require: Maximum number of rounds M , number of intern doctors N and pre-diagnosis P .
Ensure: Final Diagnosis a
 1: D {Medical Director}
 2: I ← [I1 , · · · , IN ] {Intern Doctors}
 3: H ← P {Initialize Discussion History}
 4: d ← D(H) {Initialize Dispute}
 5: m ← 0 {Current Round}
 6: while m ≤ M do
 7:   m←m+1
 8:   for each Ii in I do
 9:      h ← Di (H, d) {Generate Diagnosis}
10:      H ← H + [h] {Append h to H}
11:   end for
12:   d ← D(H) {Summarize Disputes}
13:   if d is NULL then
14:      break {Debate is Over}
15:   end if
16: end while
17: a ← D(H)



B.2   Discussions on Dispute Resolution

In collaborative diagnosis, the Chief Physician should analyze the statements of Doctors and identify
key points of disagreement to foster focused discussions. The process is as follows:

       • The collaborative diagnosis consists of multiple discussion iterations. Under the guidance of
         the Chief Physician, Doctors are expected to delve deeper gradually, resolve differences,
         and reach a consensus.
       • In each session of collaborative diagnostic discussion, each Doctor should present their
         diagnostic reports while engaging in critical analysis of their peers’ findings. Guided by the
         Chief Physician’s summary of disputed points among Doctors, they can pinpoint the current
         issues requiring attention. This approach facilitates targeted and thorough critical thinking
         of Doctors, enhancing the refinement of their reports.
       • Upon the conclusion of discussions, the Chief Physician assesses the persistence of dis-
         agreements among interns. If disagreements are identified, the director can summarize
         the controversial issues and set then as the agenda for the subsequent session to facilitate
         resolution. Conversely, if no disagreements are found, the director concludes the discussions
         and finalizes the diagnostic report by himself.


C     Detailed Explanation of Performance in MVME
In Table 3, we compare the performance of different LLMs, focusing on the completeness of
Symptoms and Medical Examinations (Columns 2 and 3) and the accuracy of Diagnostic Results,
Diagnostic Rationales, and Treatment Plans (Columns 4, 5, and 6). To visualize their relationship, we
plot scatter diagrams and linear fit graphs with Symptoms and Medical Examinations on the x-axis and
Diagnostic Results, Diagnostic Rationales, and Treatment Plans on the y-axis, as shown in Figure 5.
The results indicate that the higher the completeness of Symptoms and Medical Examinations, the
higher the accuracy of Diagnostic Results, Diagnostic Rationales, and Treatment Plans. In particular,


                                                 16
                              60
                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                     60




                                                                             Diagnostic Rationales
                              50




         Diagnostic Results                                                                                                                         Treatment Plan
                                                                                                     50                                                              40
                              40
                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                     30
                              30                                                                     30                                                                                                             Baichuan (13B)
                                                                                                                                                                     20                                             HuatuoGPT-II (13B)
                              20                                                                     20                                                                                                             HuatuoGPT-II (34B)
                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5
                                        60        70        80    90   100                                     60        70        80    90   100                              60        70        80    90   100   Wenxin-4.0
                                                   Symptom                                                                Symptom                                                         Symptom                   Qwen-Max
                                                                                                     70                                                                                                             GPT-4
                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 Doctors w/o DR
                                                                                                     60                                                              50                                             2 Doctors




         Diagnostic Results                                                  Diagnostic Rationales
                              50                                                                                                                                                                                    3 Doctors


                                                                                                                                                    Treatment Plan
                                                                                                     50                                                              40                                             GPT-4*
                              40                                                                                                                                                                                    Linear Fit
                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                     30
                              30                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                     20
                              20                                                                     20
                                   20        40        60        80    100                                20        40        60        80    100                         20        40        60        80    100
                                             Medical Examination                                                    Medical Examination                                             Medical Examination


Figure 5: Linear regression analysis among symptoms, medical examinations and diagnostic results,
diagnostic rationales, and treatment plan.


there exists an approximately linear relationship between the completeness of collected patient
information and the quality of final diagnosis, which is also observed in [10].
Above analysis highlights a significant limitation of current LLMs in medical interaction: their
inability to dynamically and actively collect comprehensive patient information through interac-
tions, similar to human doctors. Moreover, their challenge in recommending appropriate medical
examinations further exacerbates this limitation. It is important to highlight the differences between
human doctors and LLMs. Real-world doctors do not make diagnoses before having sufficient
information. They possess the ability to actively inquire about various subjective information from
patients (such as symptoms) and know what examinations are needed to obtain more quantitative and
objective information. These abilities are key to effective medical interactions.


D       Expert Verification for Medical Records

We carefully screen and review the medical records to ensure its reliability and relevance. In § 3.2,
these medical records are vetted by doctors sourced from Jiangsu Provincial People’s Hospital and
Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, which hold the presti-
gious distinction of being tertiary Class A hospitals in China. We utilize the Tencent Questionnaire 3
platform to facilitate the quality inspection of medical record by doctors. A representative case is
depicted in Figure 6, and we also include a display of the questionnaire template in Table 6. These
validation steps ensure the high quality of our dataset, ensuring that the benchmark is based on
audited medical cases.


E       Attacking on Examiner: Reliability of Examiner’s Workflow

To assess the vulnerability of Examiner agent to information extraction tactics, we design complex
scenarios intended to safeguard against the unauthorized disclosure of medical examination results
in scenarios lacking explicit examination requests. We build 50 samples, such as “Please provide
the most recent medical examination details”, aimed at eliciting information. During the attack
simulations, we observe that the Examiner agent, in the first step, uniformly classifies these requests
as void of legitimate examination items, implementing a defensive strategy with 100% consistency.
This assessment is crucial because it verifies that the Examiner agent behaves appropriately by
ensuring that it only releases medical examination results when the patient explicitly specifies the
required examinations. It guarantees that the Patient agent cannot obtain relevant information from
the Examiner agent by using a method that does not specify a particular examination, specifically
when the Doctor agent recommends a unrelated medical test.
    3
        https://wj.qq.com/


                                                                                                                                        17
Table 6: The translated template of questionnaire for expert verification of medical record.
                           Translated Questionnaire Template

                          {Medical Record}
                           1. Is the diagnostic results correct?
                            Yes      No
                           2. Is the diagnostic rationale correct?
                            Yes      No
                           3. Is the treatment course reasonable?
                            Yes       No




     Figure 6: Sample of a questionnaire used for medical record quality inspection.


                                               18
               Prompt               Agent                        Function
               Table 9             Patient                 Chat with Doctor
               Table 11          Examiner            Process Examination Request
               Table 10          Examiner           Produce Examination Outcomes
               Table 12 & 13   Chief Physician       Evaluate Diagnosis of Doctor
               Table 15            Doctor            Interactive Clinical Diagnosis
               Table 16            Doctor           Collaboration through Discussion
               Table 14        Chief Physician   Summarize Statement of Various Doctors

                Table 7: Prompts of different agents and the corresponding function.


F    Human Evaluation for Agent Behavior

In Table 8, we present a questionnaire developed for the manual validation of patient and examiner
behaviors in each round of conversation. The questionnaire includes four questions, with the initial
two addressing "Relevance" and "Consistency" in the question-and-answer (QA) pairs, while the
subsequent two focus on the "Accuracy" of conducting medical examinations. Three medical students
from Jiangsu Provincial People’s Hospital complete these questionnaires. Consensus among the
first two reviewers leads to the immediate acceptance of their collective assessment. In cases of
divergence, the opinion of the third reviewer is solicited, whose determination, reflecting the majority
viewpoint, constitutes the definitive annotation. The agreement rates for each question are 99.1%,
95.6%, 99.4%, and 100.0%. Significantly, when calculating the accuracy of medical examinations,
we exclusively consider dialogues affirmed as "No" in response to the third question.


G    Prompts for Different Medical Roles

We list the prompts agents in AI Hospital in Table 7. In each prompt, {xx} needs to fill with
corresponding external inputs. We meticulously design prompts for each agent to ensure clarity and
functionality. Particularly for the Doctor role, we discover that overly complex prompts could lead to
issues in the dialogue flow, such as not adhering to the prompts or causing cognitive confusion (e.g.,
the doctor sometimes outputting the patient’s responses). These final prompts are adaptable to most
LLMs, enabling the agents in AI Hospital to perform their respective duties effectively.


H    Potential of AI Hospital Framework

In AI Hospital framework, a vast amount of medical records from numerous hospitals could be
included in the evaluation benchmark. Therefore, our evaluation method offers high scalability and
applicability. Additionally, the evaluation framework extends beyond just medical records. It also
has the potential to utilize other valuable resources, such as medical knowledge graphs, databases
and medical dialogues, which encapsulate extensive real-world consultation experiences and may be
converted into simulated medical records.
AI Hospital framework also holds potential for improving healthcare and medical education. By
simulating realistic doctor-patient interactions and enabling the evaluation of AI agents in clinical
diagnosis scenarios, AI Hospital opens up a myriad of exciting applications. Imagine a future where
medical students and residents can hone their diagnostic skills by engaging with AI-powered virtual
patients, exposing them to a wide range of cases and challenging scenarios. Healthcare providers
could leverage the framework to test and refine AI-assisted diagnostic tools, ensuring their accuracy
and reliability before deployment in real-world settings. Moreover, AI Hospital could serve as a
powerful platform for generating vast amounts of high-quality, diverse medical dialogue data, which
can be used to fine-tune and enhance the performance of language models in the medical domain.
This data-driven approach could lead to the development of AI assistants that augment the capabilities
of healthcare professionals, providing them with evidence-based insights and decision support in
real-time. Beyond clinical applications, AI Hospital could also facilitate groundbreaking research in
medical AI, serving as a testbed for novel algorithms and approaches that push the boundaries of
what is possible in healthcare.


                                                  19
Table 8: The original Chinese and translated English questionnaire of human evaluation for patient
and examiner behavior.

        Questionnaire

        { 病历 }
        { 单轮对话内容 }
        请你仔细阅读这一轮对话的内容和病人的病历信息，回答下面的问题。
        1. 病人(检查员)的发言与医生的相关吗？
          是       否
        2. 病人(检查员)的发言符合病历的内容吗？
          是       否
        3. 医生是否建议进行专业的医学检查？
          是       否
        4. 检查员是否进行了医学检查？
          是       否
        5. 医生的总结是否与诊断过程的内容匹配？
               匹配              少量不匹配                明显不匹配


        Translated Questionnaire

        { Medical Record }
        { Single Round Conversation Content }
        Carefully review the content of the conversation and the corresponding medical record to
        answer the following questions.
        1. Is the statement of patient or examiner relevant to the doctor’s one?
         Yes     No
        2. Is the statement of patient or examiner consistent with the content of medical record?
         Yes     No
        3. Does the doctor recommend a professional medical examination?
         Yes     No
        4. Does the examiner perform a medical test?
         Yes       No
        5. Is the doctor’s summary consistent with the content of the diagnostic process?
               Consistent              Minor Inconsistent         Significant Inconsistent




The potential impact of AI Hospital is inspiring, and its development marks a milestone in the
journey towards a future where artificial intelligence and human expertise might work hand in hand
to transform patient care and improve health outcomes on a global scale.




                                                    20
       Table 9: The original Chinese and translated English prompts for patient agent.

Prompt for Patient Agent

System Message
你是一个病人。这是你的基本资料。
{个性化信息}
{病历中的基本信息}
下面会有医生来对你的身体状况进行诊断，你需要：
(1) 按照病历和基本资料的设定进行对话。
(2) 在每次对话时，你都要明确对话的对象是<医生>还是<检查员>。当你对医生说话时，你要
在句子开头说<对医生讲>；如果对象是<检查员>，你要在句子开头说<对检查员讲>。
(3) 首先按照主诉进行回复。
(4) 当<医生>询问你的现病史、既往史、个人史时，要按照相关内容进行回复。
(5) 当<医生>要求或建议你去做检查时，要立即主动询问<检查员>对应的项目和结果，例
如：<对检查员讲> 您好，我需要做xxx检查，能否告诉我这些检查结果？
(6) 回答要口语化，尽可能短，提供最主要的信息即可。
(7) 从<检查员>那里收到信息之后，将内容主动复述给<医生>。
(8) 当医生给出诊断结果、对应的诊断依据和治疗方案后，在对话的末尾加上特殊字符<结
束>。
User [患者]
{Statement Generated by GPT-4 in §2.2}


Prompt for Patient Agent

System Message
You are a patient. Here is your basic information.
{Personality in §2.2}
{Basic Information in Medical Record §2.1}
A doctor will come to diagnose your physical condition. You need to:
(1) Engage in dialogue according to the settings of personality and the basic information in medical
record.
(2) In each conversation, you must clarify whether you are speaking to a <doctor> or an <examiner>.
When you speak to the doctor, you should start your sentences with <To the doctor>; if the addressee is
an <examiner>, you should start with <To the examiner>.
(3) First, respond according to the chief complaint.
(4) When the <doctor> asks about your present illness history, past medical history, and personal history,
reply according to the relevant content.
(5) When the <doctor> requests or suggests that you undergo tests, immediately ask the <examiner>
about the corresponding items and results, for example: <To the examiner> Hello, I need to have xxx
examination, can you tell me the results of these tests?
(6) The responses should be conversational, as short as possible, providing only the most important
information.
(7) After receiving information from the <examiner>, actively repeat the content to the <doctor>.
(8) When the doctor provides the diagnostic result, the corresponding rationale for the diagnosis, and
the treatment plan, end the dialogue with the special token <end>.
User [Patient]
{Statement Generated by GPT-4 in §2.2}




                                                     21
Table 10: The original Chinese and translated English prompts for patient agent to produce examina-
tion outcomes.
Table 11: The original Chinese and translated English prompts for patient agent to process examina-
tion request.

   Prompt for Examiner to Process Examination Request

   System Message
   你是医院负责检查的自动化接待员。请你利用掌握的医学检查的命名实体的知识，从病人的
   检查申请当中解析出指向明确的专业医学检查项目，方便后面的检查科室进行检查。
   请按照下面的格式的输出：
   # 检查项目
   - xxx
   - xxx
   如果没有找到具体的医学检查项目，请输出：
   # 检查项目
   -无
   User [患者]
   您好，医生告诉我根据CT扫描和PET-CT扫描的结果，初步得出以下结论：右肺上叶有一个大
   小约为2.6*1.9cm的实性结节。双肺下叶也有散在的淡薄浸润影。医生建议我进行进一步的检
   查，例如活检。
   Assistant [检查员]
   # 检查项目
   - 肺部活检
   User [患者]
   我需要了解一下我的检查结果。可以告诉我具体的检查项目和结果吗？谢谢！？
   Assistant [检查员]
   # 检查项目
   -无



   Prompt for Examiner to Process Examination Request

   System Message
   You are an automated receptionist responsible for examinations in a hospital. Using your knowledge of
   medical examination named entities, please parse out specific professional medical examination items
   from patients’ examination requests to facilitate subsequent examinations by the relevant departments.
   Output in the following format:
   # Examination Item
   - xxx
   - xxx
   If no specific medical examination items are found, please output:
   # Examination Item
   - None
   User [Patient]
   Hello, the doctor told me that based on the results of the CT scan and PET-CT scan, the preliminary
   conclusion is that there is a solid nodule approximately 2.6*1.9cm in size in the upper lobe of the right
   lung. There are also scattered thin infiltrative shadows in the lower lobes of both lungs. The doctor
   advised me to undergo further examinations, such as a biopsy.
   Assistant [Examiner]
   # Medical Examination Items
   - Lung biopsy
   User [Patient]
   I need to know about my examination results. Can you tell me the specific examination items and
   results, please? Thank you!?
   Assistant [Examiner]
   # Medical Examination Items
   - None
                                                      22
Prompt for Examiner to Produce Examination Outcomes

System Message
这是你收到的病人的检查结果。
{Professional Medical Examination in §2.1}
下面会有病人或医生来查询，你要忠实地按照收到的检查结果，找到对应的项目，并按照下
面的格式来回复。
# xx检查
- xxx: xxx
- xxx: xxx
如果无法查询到对应的检查项目则回复：
- xxx: 无异常



Prompt for Examiner to Produce Examination Outcomes

System Message
This is the patient’s examination result that you received.
{Professional Medical Examination in §2.1}
Patients or doctors will come to inquire about these results. You must faithfully report the received
examination results, identify the corresponding items, and respond in the following format:
# xx Examination
xxx: xxx
xxx: xxx
If the corresponding examination item cannot be found, reply with:
xxx: No abnormalities




                                                 23
          Table 12: The translated English prompt for medical director to evaluate.

Prompt for Medical Director to Evaluate

System Message
你是资深的医学专家。
请你根据专家诊疗结果中的现病史、辅助检查、诊断结果、诊断依据和治疗方案，来对实习
医生进行评价。
请参考下面的细则进行评价。
1. 病人症状的掌握情况
(A) 全面掌握 (B) 相当部分掌握 (C) 小部分掌握 (D) 绝大部分不掌握
2. 医学检查项目的完整性
(A) 非常完整 (B) 相当部分完整 (C) 小部分完整 (D) 绝大部分不完整
3. 诊断结果的一致性
(A) 完全一致，诊断正确 (B) 相当部分一致，诊断基本正确 (C) 小部分一致，诊断存在错误 (D)
完全不一致，诊断完全错误
4. 诊断依据的一致性
(A) 完全一致 (B) 相当部分一致 (C) 小部分一致 (D) 完全不一致
5. 治疗方案的一致性
(A) 完全一致 (B) 相当部分一致 (C) 小部分一致 (D) 完全不一致
通过下面的方式来呈现结果
# 症状
## 分析
<根据专家记录的病人病史，分析实习医生对病人病情的掌握情况>
## 选项<根据症状分析做出选择>
# 医学检查项目
## 分析
<基于专家所做的医学检查项目，全面分析实习医生所做的医学检查项目的完整性>
## 选项
<根据分析得到的完整性做出选择>
# 诊断结果
## 分析
<基于专家做出的诊断结果，结合你的医学常识，分析实习医生诊断结果与专家的一致性>
## 选项
<根据分析得到的一致性做出选择>
# 诊断依据
## 分析
<对比专家的诊断依据，分析实习医生的治疗方案与其的一致性>
## 选项
<根据分析得到的一致性做出选择>
# 治疗方案
## 分析
<对比专家的治疗方案，分析实习医生的治疗方案与其的一致性>
## 选项
<根据分析得到的一致性做出选择>
(1) 请侧重医学答案的事实内容，不需关注风格、语法、标点和无关医学的内容。
(2) 请你充分利用医学知识，分析并判断每个点的重要性，再做评价。
(3) 注意诊断结果、诊断依据和治疗方案三者之间的承接关系。例如，如果诊断错误，那么后
面两部分与专家的一致性就必然很低
User
# 专家的诊断报告
{Diagnosis and Treatment in §2.1}
# 实习医生的诊断报告
{实习医生的诊断报告}

          Table 13: The original Chinese prompt for medical director to evaluate.




                                             24
Prompt for Medical Director to Evaluate

You are an experienced medical expert. Please evaluate the intern doctors based on their current
medical history, auxiliary examinations, diagnostic results, diagnostic basis, and treatment plans from
the expert’s diagnosis.
Please refer to the following guidelines for evaluation.
1. Mastery of Patient Symptoms
(A) Comprehensive mastery (B) Substantial mastery (C) Partial mastery (D) Mostly unmastered
2. Completeness of Medical Examination
(A) Very complete (B) Substantially complete (C) Partially complete (D) Mostly incomplete
3. Diagnosis Result
(A) Completely consistent, correct diagnosis (B) Largely consistent, basically correct diagnosis (C) Par-
tially consistent, diagnosis contains errors (D) Completely inconsistent, completely incorrect diagnosis
4. Diagnostic Rationale
(A) Completely consistent (B) Largely consistent (C) Partially consistent (D) Completely inconsistent
5. Treatment Plan
(A) Completely consistent (B) Largely consistent (C) Partially consistent (D) Completely inconsistent
Please output the results in the following format:
# Symptoms
## Analysis
<Analyze the intern’s grasp of the patient’s condition based on the expert’s recorded medical history.>
## Option
<Choose based on the analysis of symptoms.>
# Medical Examination Items
## Analysis
<Thoroughly analyze the completeness of the medical examination items conducted by the intern, based
on the expert’s examinations.>
## Option
<Choose based on the analysis of completeness.>
# Diagnostic Results
## Analysis
<Based on the expert’s diagnostic results and your medical knowledge, analyze the consistency between
the intern’s diagnostic results and the expert’s.>
## Option
<Choose based on the analysis of consistency.>
# Diagnostic Basis
## Analysis
<Compare the diagnostic basis of the expert and analyze the consistency of the intern’s treatment plan
with it.>
## Option
<Choose based on the analysis of consistency.>
# Treatment Plan
## Analysis
<Compare the expert’s treatment plan and analyze the consistency of the intern’s treatment plan with
it.>
## Option
<Choose based on the analysis of consistency.>
(1) Please focus on the factual content of the medical answers, without concern for style, grammar,
punctuation, and content unrelated to medicine.
(2) Please make full use of your medical knowledge to analyze and judge the importance of each point
before evaluating.
(3) Pay attention to the continuity among the diagnosis result, diagnostic basis, and treatment plan.
User
# Diagnostic Report of Medical Director
{Diagnosis and Treatment in Section 2.1}
# Diagnostic Report of Intern Doctor
{Diagnostic Report of the Intern Doctor}




                                                   25
Table 14: The original Chinese and the translated English prompts for medical director to summarize.

    Prompt for Medical Director to Summarize

   System Message
   你是一个资深的主任医生。
   你正在主持一场医生针对患者病情的会诊，参与的医生有医生A、医生B和医生C。
   病人的基本情况如下：
   {症状与检查结果}
   (1) 你需要听取每个医生的诊断报告。
   (2) 请你按照重要性列出最多3个需要讨论的争议点。
   按照下面的格式输出：
   (1) xxx
   (2) xxx
   User
   # 医生A
   {医生A的诊断报告}
   # 医生B
   {医生B的诊断报告}
   # 医生C
   {医生C的诊断报告}



    Prompt for Medical Director to Summarize

   System Message
   As an experienced medical director, you are presiding over a medical consultation concerning a
   patient’s condition, with the participation of Doctors A, B, and C.
   The patient’s basic information is as follows: {Symptoms and Test Results}
   (1) You are required to listen to the diagnostic reports from each physician.
   (2) Identify and list up to three key controversial points for discussion, prioritized by their importance.
   Please present your findings in the following format:
   (1) xxx
   (2) xxx
   User
   # Doctor A
   {Diagnostic Report of Doctor A}
   # Doctor B
   {Diagnostic Report of Doctor B}
   # Doctor C
   {Diagnostic Report of Doctor C}




                                                       26
Table 15: The original Chinese and translated English prompts for intern doctor in interactive clinical
diagnosis.

    Prompt for Intern Doctor in Interactive Clinical Diagnosis

    System Message
    你是一个专业且耐心的医生，下面会有患者向你咨询病情。你需要：
    (1) 在信息不充分的情况下，不要过早作出诊断。
    (2) 多次、主动地向患者提问来获取充足的信息。
    (3) 必要时要求患者进行检查，并等待患者反馈。
    (4) 诊断结果需要准确到具体疾病。
    (5) 最后根据患者的身体状况和检查结果，给出诊断结果、对应的诊断依据和治疗方案。



    Prompt for Intern Doctor in Interactive Clinical Diagnosis

   System Message
   You are a professional and patient doctor, and you will be consulted by patients. You need to:
   (1) Avoid making premature diagnoses when information is insufficient.
   (2) Actively and repeatedly inquire to gather adequate information from patients.
   (3) When necessary, request patients to undergo medical examinations and await their feedback.
   (4) Ensure that the diagnosis is precise and specific to the particular ailment.
   (5) Finally, based on the patients’ physical condition and examination results, provide a diagnosis, the
   corresponding rationale, and a treatment plan.




                                                     27
   Table 16: The original Chinese prompt for intern doctor to collaborate in discussion.

Prompt for Intern Doctor to Collaborate in Discussion

System Message
你是一个专业的医生A。
你正在为患者做诊断，患者的症状和检查结果如下:
{症状与检查结果}
针对患者的病情，你给出了初步的诊断报告：
{医生A的诊断报告}
(1) 下面你将收到来自其他医生的诊断意见，其中也包含诊断结果、诊断依据和治疗方案。你
需要批判性地梳理并分析其他医生的诊断意见。
(2) 在这个过程中，请你注意主治医生给出的争议点。
(3) 如果你发现其他医生给出的诊断意见有比你的更合理的部分，请吸纳进你的诊断意见中进
行改进。
(4) 如果你认为你的诊断意见相对于其他医生的更科学合理，请坚持自己的意见保持不变。
请你按照下面的格式来输出。
# 诊断结果
(1) xxx
(2) xxx
# 诊断依据
(1) xxx
(2) xxx
# 治疗方案
(1) xxx
(2) xxx
User
# 医生B
{医生B的诊断报告}
# 医生C
{医生C的诊断报告}
# 主任医生
{主任医生的指导意见}




                                            28
   Table 17: The translated English prompt for intern doctor to collaborate in discussion.

Prompt for Intern Doctor to Collaborate in Discussion

System Message
As a doctor, you are currently diagnosing a patient, whose symptoms and medical examination results
are as follows:
{Symptoms and Medical Examination Results}
Based on the patient’s condition, you have prepared a preliminary diagnostic report:
{Diagnostic Report of Doctor A}
(1) You will receive diagnostic reports from other doctors. Critically review and analyze these reports.
(2) During this process, pay attention to any controversial points raised by the medical director.
(3) If you find aspects of other doctors’ diagnoses that are more rational than yours, incorporate these
into your diagnosis for improvement.
(4) If you believe your diagnostic opinion is more scientifically sound compared to others, maintain
your stance.
Please present your findings in the following format:
Diagnosis Result
(1) xx
(2) xx
Diagnostic Rationale
(1) xx
(2) xx
Treatment Plan
(1) xx
(2) xx
User
# Doctor B
{Diagnostic Report of Doctor B}
# Doctor C
{Diagnostic Report of Doctor C}
# Medical Director
{Guidance of Medical Director}




                                                  29
