                                           MedCritical: Enhancing Medical Reasoning in Small
                                           Language Models via Self-Collaborative Correction
                                               Xinchun Su1 , Chunxu Luo1 , Yixuan Li1 , Weidong Yang1,∗, Lipeng Ma1,∗
                                                       a
                                                           School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China




arXiv:2509.23368v1 [cs.CL] 27 Sep 2025
                                         Abstract
                                         In the field of medicine, complex reasoning tasks such as clinical diagnosis, treat-
                                         ment planning, and medical knowledge integration pose significant challenges,
                                         where small language models often underperform compared to large language
                                         models like GPT-4 and Deepseek. Recent knowledge distillation-based meth-
                                         ods aim to address these issues through teacher-guided error correction, but this
                                         LLM as judge approach remains challenging in terms of cost, time, and efficiency.
                                         To circumvent this issue, we propose a novel two-stage framework, MedCritical,
                                         which uses a small language model fine-tuned by a large teacher model to play
                                         against itself. In the first stage, we extract high-level and detailed long-chain
                                         thought templates from the teacher model to guide the student model to gener-
                                         ate more complex reasoning thoughts. In the second stage, we introduce direct
                                         preference optimization (DPO) through model self-iteration collaboration to en-
                                         hance the reasoning ability of the student model by playing against the correction
                                         trajectory of the fine-tuned model during training. This model self-learning DPO
                                         approach teaches the student model to use its own error-driven insights to consol-
                                         idate its skills and knowledge to solve complex problems, and achieves compa-
                                         rable results to traditional knowledge distillation methods using teacher models
                                         at a lower cost. Notably, our MedCritical 7B model outperforms the Taiyi and
                                         Huatuo-o1-7B models by 3.04% and 10.12% respectively on the CMExam bench-
                                         mark, achieving new SOTA performance among 7B-class small models. All con-
                                         tent mentioned is open-sourced at https://github.com/destinybird/
                                         SP-Huatuo.

                                           ∗
                                              Corresponding authors
                                              Email addresses: 22300240012@m.fudan.edu.cn (Xinchun Su),
                                         22110240100@m.fudan.edu.cn (Chunxu Luo), yxli24@m.fudan.edu.cn (Yixuan
                                         Li), wdyang@fudan.edu.cn (Weidong Yang), lpma21@m.fudan.edu.cn (Lipeng Ma)
Keywords: Knowledge acquisition, Large Language Models, Medical
Application


1. Introduction
    LLMs, such as GPT-4 and DeepSeek, demonstrate remarkable performance
across various reasoning tasks. However, their application in specialized and
highly complex domains, particularly medicine, presents unique and significant
challenges that often expose the limitations of general-purpose models. Unlike
other fields, medical reasoning demands not only a vast breadth of knowledge,
encompassing diverse sub-disciplines from diagnostics to pharmacology, but also
an unparalleled depth of understanding, requiring nuanced interpretation of symp-
toms, patient histories, and intricate biological processes. The inherent com-
plexity of medical knowledge, coupled with the dynamic and evolving nature of
medical knowledge, means that traditional LLMs, despite extensive pre-training,
frequently struggle with the precision, reliability, and contextual understanding
critical for clinical applications. Existing research attempts to enhance the medi-
cal performance of LLMs through various methods, broadly categorized into tra-
ditional fine-tuning optimization and reflection-based optimization. Traditional
fine-tuning approaches, including supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and alignment
strategies like reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) or direct
preference optimization (DPO), achieve notable progress in general language tasks.
However, these methods often optimize for direct answers or simplistic reasoning
paths, proving insufficient for the multi-step, intricate reasoning required in com-
plex medical scenarios. The challenges in medicine, such as the need for accurate
differential diagnoses, personalized treatment plans, and the integration of mul-
tidisciplinary information, necessitate models that can perform deep reasoning
rather than merely generating plausible responses. Recent reflection-based meth-
ods aim to overcome these limitations by guiding language models to self-reflect
and self-correct during reasoning. While LLMs possess some inherent capacity
for self-correction,SLMs typically lack this ability. Although large models can
be employed to correct errors in SLMs, relying on them for this purpose incurs
significant computational cost and time consumption, making it an economically
unfeasible solution for widespread application. Consequently, existing methods
often fail to strike a balance between effectiveness in handling medical complex-
ity and computational efficiency. To address these specific challenges within the
medical domain and overcome the limitations of current LLM training paradigms,


                                        2
we propose MedCritical, a novel two-stage framework designed to significantly
improve the reasoning capabilities of SLMs in medical contexts. Our approach is
specifically tailored to tackle the dual challenges of broad knowledge scope and
deep reasoning requirements in medicine. In the first stage, we employ SFTby ex-
tracting high-level and detailed long-chain thought templates from a large teacher
model. This process guides the student model to generate more sophisticated and
medically relevant reasoning thoughts, thereby addressing the knowledge breadth
and initial reasoning depth. In the second stage, we introduce a novel model self-
collaboration DPO mechanism. This stage enhances the reasoning ability of the
student model by enabling it to learn from its own error-driven insights through
self-iteration and adversarial correction trajectories. This self-learning DPO ap-
proach is crucial for consolidating the skills and knowledge of the SLM, allowing
it to navigate the intricate and often ambiguous nature of medical problems more
effectively and efficiently than traditional knowledge distillation methods. By en-
abling the model to identify and correct its own weaknesses, MedCritical provides
a robust solution for developing highly capable medical SLMs at a significantly
lower cost. Furthermore, we construct high-quality fine-tuning and optimization
datasets specifically curated for medical question-answering, comprising 13,000
samples from an original dataset, with a thought-level error correction optimiza-
tion training set of 3,000 samples. This training set includes medical questions,
pre-designed thought chain formats, and teacher-generated steps based on real an-
swers, alongside a 10,000-sample test set. Our contributions are summarized as
follows:
     (i) We propose MedCritical, a novel two-stage fine-tuning method specifically
designed to enhance the medical reasoning ability of SLMs by addressing the
unique challenges of the domain.
     (ii) We introduce model self-collaboration DPO, an innovative approach that
leverages a fine-tuned small LLM for self-adversarial learning, thereby signif-
icantly improving its reasoning capabilities and overcoming inherent reasoning
bottlenecks in complex medical tasks.
     (iii) We construct two high-quality, medically-focused datasets and develop
a powerful medical reasoning model, achieving an accuracy of 70.62% on the
CMExam dataset, setting a new SOTA performance record among all 7B models.

2. Related Work
   Application of Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback in LLMs
To enhance the performance and reliability of LLMs , the RLHF method pro-

                                        3
posed by [1] and [2] is introduced for LLM alignment. This method imposes
higher requirements on the dataset, as it necessitates paired annotated data to train
the reward model, thereby reflecting human preferences. Subsequently, reinforce-
ment learning is employed to train the policy model to maximize the estimated
reward. Although this method has proven effective, the process is complex and
computationally intensive due to its reliance on the quality of the reward model.
To simplify this process, DPO [3] is proposed, which directly uses paired data for
optimization. By defining the preference loss as a function of the policy, DPO can
optimize the policy using simple training techniques, avoiding the complexity of
reinforcement learning. However, current methods have limited improvements in
medical reasoning, stemming from the design of the optimization unit. Studies
such as Step-DPO [4] establish more granular reward units by treating each in-
termediate reasoning step as a basic unit. However, they fail to fully leverage the
self-learning capabilities of fine-tuned models. This paper specifically designs a
model self-collaborative reasoning reward to efficiently utilize this aspect.
    Thinking Extensions for Medical Reasoning Thinking extensions for med-
ical reasoning primarily focus on pre-designed reasoning structures or templates
to enhance LLM medical reasoning capabilities through prompting techniques.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompts [5] and their variants [6, 7, 8], such as from
few to many [9], decomposed prompts [10], and automatic CoT [11] — prompt-
ing LLMs to decompose complex problems into simpler sub-tasks, systematically
solve them, and then summarize the final answer. Innovative methods such as
“Thinking Trees” [12] and “Thinking Maps” [13] further complicate the field by
exploring dynamic, nonlinear reasoning paths to expand the heuristic capabilities
of LLMs [14, 15]. However, these methods face challenges such as increased re-
source requirements, higher time complexity, reliance on manual prompt design,
and optimization for specific task types. The recently proposed BoT [16] adopts
a task-agnostic meta-buffer paradigm to efficiently solve problems based on ac-
cumulated thinking templates. However, this is a training-free framework that
may not fundamentally enhance LLM’s reasoning capabilities. This paper pro-
poses a new paradigm that enables LLM to enhance its reasoning ability through
its own right-wrong confrontation, thereby breaking through the limitations of
LLM’s original thinking and expanding the model’s ability to solve a wider range
of problems.




                                         4
3. Method
3.1. Overview of two-stage training framework
    This section introduces our two-stage training framework in detail and shows
our training process in Figure 1. In the first stage, given a raw medical question-
answer set, we use a large language model (see Section 3.2) to generate detailed
reasoning chains and answers for it based on a given long thought chain template,
and then use these data to fine-tune the small model. In the second stage, based on
multiple responses of the fine-tuned small model to the original question, we use
the large language model to make correct or incorrect judgments, and combine
its correct or incorrect answers to the same question into pairs (see Section 3.3)
for DPO to obtain the final result model. The whole process is essentially a self-
criticism of the small model after training, so it is named MedCritical.

      1    Stage 1:Knowledge Distillation-guided Supervised Fine-tuning

              QwQ-32B                          Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct

                          Long CoT                                   answer              T1
                                     Knowledge
                                     question-
                                      answer                          xN          T2     …      TN
                                                   SFT

      2   Mid-process: Transforming Errors into Valuable Insights

                     T1
                                                         …                                     T-F
                     …                                                                        tuples
              T2            TN
                                       Judge                      Compose

      3   Stage 2:Direct preference optimization and result verification

                          DPO             answer
             T-F
            tuples                                     Original
                                                       Question
                                                                                                scores
                                                                          LLM as Judge




Figure 1: Pipeline of MedCritical framework, illustrating supervised fine-tuning with long chain-
of-thought templates and model self-collaborative DPO for enhancing medical reasoning inSLMs.




                                                   5
3.2. Supervised Fine-Tuning Based on Long Thinking Chain Thinking Templates
     Constructing Thinking Templates from Teacher LLMs
Traditional instruction-response datasets used for training LLMs [2] primarily fo-
cus on the correctness of responses, leading LLMs to merely simulate given so-
lutions and answers while neglecting the importance of intermediate long think-
ing chains. Recent studies such as BoT utilize high-level reasoning guidelines
(thinking templates) to enable LLMs to efficiently solve similar problems without
additional training. However, for complex and diverse mathematical reasoning
tasks, we find that high-level thinking templates alone are insufficient, especially
for small LLMs. To enable small LLMs to handle complex reasoning tasks, we
specifically design a long-chain thinking template extracted from a large teacher
LLM to transfer its capabilities to a small student LLM. This new long-chain
thinking template includes a format requirement specification and a detailed ex-
ample of long-chain reasoning. To avoid irrelevant information in the template
interfering with medical domain problems, the former provides a generic format
specification solution for general problems, while the latter details the model’s
self-reasoning, exploration, and reflection processes in long thinking chains for
problems in other domains. Based on this long thinking chain thinking tem-
plate, we can propose a new fine-tuning objective aimed at integrating human-like
problem-solving structures into model reasoning and explicitly generating long
thinking chains during the reasoning process. We first collect a set of medical
problem instances D = {(q, a)}, where each instance contains a question q and
its direct answer a. For each problem q ∈ D, we first use a predefined prompt P
to extract a long reasoning chain c from a teacher state-of-the-art reasoning LLM
(e.g., QwQ-32B).
Then, we can obtain a high-quality fine-tuning dataset Dsft :

                                  Dsft = (q, a, c)

where c is the solution of the long reasoning chain. We provide an example of a
long reasoning chain thinking template, as shown in the text box below.




                                         6
 Long Chain-of-Thought Template Introduction
 You are a medical expert. Please structure your response to the question:{user_question}{question_mark} using
 the format <think>-[here is your chain of thought]-</think>-<answer>-[here is your formal
 answer]-</answer>.

    - Role: This section defines the model’s role as a medical expert and specifies the required response structure
 (<think> and </think>, <answer> and </answer> tags). It ensures a professional perspective and clear
 output organization.

 Please provide a detailed reasoning process, ensuring the chain of thought is clear, logically rigorous, and
 progresses step-by-step. Analyze the problem thoroughly, explore possible answers, correct any errors, and
 ultimately arrive at a conclusion. This is a multi-line text to test the effect on subsequent lines.

    - Role: This section guides the model to use a detailed, step-by-step reasoning process, enhancing medical
 problem-solving quality.

 <think> Hmm, the user is asking why people on the internet often compare opponents to something worse than
 Nazis, even making Nazis seem good by comparison. This is a complex question, and I need to clarify the
 possible aspects first. Initially, the user might notice extreme online rhetoric, where one side uses Nazis to
 denigrate the other, leading to phrases like “worse than Nazis,” which relativizes the original symbol of extreme
 evil. This could involve several factors: the exaggeration of online speech, lack of historical knowledge, a
 slippery slope in moral comparisons, and the trend toward polarized communication. </think>

    - Role: This section provides a non-medical example of the <think> format, using a detailed, step-by-step
 reasoning process about internet rhetoric. Its purpose is to guide the model to emulate this depth for medical
 questions, avoiding interference by focusing on an unrelated domain.

 <answer> The phenomenon of people on the internet labeling opponents as “worse than Nazis” and even
 making Nazis seem glorified is the result of multiple complex social, psychological, and communicative factors.
 The main causes and logical chain are as follows: . . . II. Influence of Internet Propagation Mechanisms
 Emotion-Driven Algorithm Logic Social media platforms favor promoting controversial, emotional content.
 Extreme rhetoric (e.g., comparing opponents to Nazis) triggers emotions like anger or fear, gaining more
 visibility. . . . IV. Consequences and Reflection Undermining Historical Seriousness The uniqueness of Nazi
 crimes is blurred, weakening public vigilance against true extremism. . . . Conclusion This phenomenon is a
 microcosm of the internet era’s struggle for discourse dominance: when extremism becomes a shortcut to
 attention, the complexity of history and reality is sacrificed. </answer>

    - Role: This section demonstrates the <answer> format with a non-medical example, summarizing reasoning
 into a structured conclusion. It guides the model to present concise medical diagnoses or treatments, maintaining
 clarity without domain overlap.

 This question’s answer is: {reference_answer}

    - Role: This section subtly embeds the correct answer for medical questions, ensuring the model derives it
 through reasoning without direct reference, preserving the authenticity of the process.

 Please strictly follow the format, starting with the <think> tag for a detailed self-reflection, exploration, and
 self-correction long chain of thought, ending with </think>. Then begin the formal answer with <answer>,
 ending with </answer>. The question to address is: {user_question}{question_mark}

    - Role: This section enforces the structured format, ensuring disciplined medical reasoning and response
 alignment.

   Thought-based supervised fine-tuning
After organizing the long chain-of-thought dataset Dsft , our optimization goal is


                                                         7
to enable student LLMs π to reason using long chains of thought and gain a more
comprehensive understanding of each problem-solving process, which can be ex-
pressed as:
                   Lsft (π) = E(q,a,c)∼Dsft [log π(c, a|q, Pstu )]
Starting from the base student LLM π, Lsft achieves optimization by maximizing
the likelihood of the response given the prompt Pstu and the input question q,
where Pstu represents the predefined prompt Ptea . After the fine-tuning process,
we significantly enhance the reasoning capabilities of the base student LLM by
learning the long chain-of-thought reasoning of state-of-the-art reasoning LLMs,
enabling the student LLM to generate reasoning similar to that accompanying the
final answer. Subsequently, we obtain the fine-tuned student LLM πref , which can
be used for cross-model collaborative DPO in Section 4.2.

3.3. Model self-improvement DPO
    Improving DPO by self-comparison
Although error correction methods dominated by LLMs have proven effective in
DPO practice, their optimization objectives are inefficient for complex medical
reasoning tasks. As pointed out by [4], the problem arises because the monopoly
of LLMs makes us ignore the valuable resources generated by small models in
large corpora. This may lead to a longer training process without significant im-
provement in results, because the previously fine-tuned small model’s ability to
solve is comparable to that of LLMs in the medical field. In addition, it is difficult
for LLM to locate errors and obtain improvements from them [17]. This is similar
to a student trying to gain subtle insights from a correct long solution. The root
of the problem is that there are too many distractions and it is difficult to focus on
pointing out the problem and giving the correct solution. To solve this problem,
we avoid the overly fine error pointing of LLMs and instead focus on the overall
optimization objective, giving priority to instance-level preferences. Specifically,
we first let the large language model judge whether the student model is correct,
and then use the overall comparison results of correct and incorrect answers in
multiple answers to the same question as the optimization unit. This method pri-
oritizes the model self-control trajectory of the student LLM πtea rather than the
minor correction trajectory of the teacher LLM πref , thereby improving the ability
of the student LLM.
    Collecting correct and incorrect thinking
In order to achieve correction at the thinking level, we need to collect a dataset
containing paired data of correct and incorrect thinking. Specifically, we use the


                                          8
fine-tuned student model πref to perform multiple reasoning based on thinking
chains on the sampled test dataset Dtest = {qtest }, and obtain the test result Dpred =
{qtest , atest }. The teacher LLM makes a binary judgment of correct or incorrect for
each atest , and finally obtains the correct-incorrect dataset:
                                                         −
                           Dcor-err = {qtest , {A+
                                                 test , Atest }},

                                                      −
Where A+   test is the correct solution set, Atest is the incorrect solution set of the
corresponding problem. Here, we use powerful models in the current medical
reasoning field (such as QwQ-32B) as experienced teacher models πtea . To ensure
the accuracy of the correct or incorrect binary classification, we design a prompt
PC to guide πtea to deterministically output 1 or 2 (representing correct or incor-
rect) in the provided answer.
    Improving Reasoning Ability by Model Self-correction
In the second stage of the method, our proposed model self-collaborative DPO
uses the self-opposition of the student LLM to improve its reasoning and general-
ization ability. As shown in formula (7), comparing the above correct reasoning
                                          −
A+test with the incorrect reasoning Atest , our model self-collaborative DPO aims to
maximize the probability that the student LLM correctly answers the question q.
The optimization objective of our model self-cooperative DPO can be expressed
as:
                                                                     πθ (A+
                                                             
                                                                            test |q)
           LDPO-self (θ) = − E(q,Atest ,Atest )∼Dcor-err log σ β log
                                   +     −
                                                                     πref (A+test |q)
                                               −
                                                        
                                    πθ (Atest |q)
                           −β log                          ,
                                   πref (A−    test |q)




4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup and Baselines
    To evaluate our MedCritical framework, we utilize the CMExam dataset from
https://github.com/williamliujl/CMExam, which originally con-
tains 68,000 samples. We filter 13,887 eligible samples, with a training set of
3,000 for fine-tuning and optimization, and a test set of 10,887 for evaluation.
As detailed below, we explain the implementation details of the ten evaluation
methods. The baseline Student model is Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct and the Teacher
model is QwQ-32B, which serves as the provider of high-quality reasoning chains.

                                             9
 Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of MedCritical Framework for Student Model
   Input: Medical Dataset D, Teacher Model πtea , Student Model πstu
   Output: Fine-tuned Student Model πstu
   Stage 1: Supervised Fine-Tuning with Long Chain-of-Thought
   Initialize fine-tuning dataset Dsft = ∅;
   foreach (q, a) ∈ D do
          c ← πtea (q, Ptea ) Add (q, a, c) to Dsft ;
   foreach (q, a, c) ∈ Dsft do
        Update πstu to maximize log πstu (c, a|q, Pstu )
   Set πref ← πstu Stage 2: Model Self-Collaborative DPO
   Initialize correct-erroneous dataset Dcor-err = ∅;
   foreach q ∈ Dtest do
                                   −
          Initialize A+test = ∅, Atest = ∅;
          for i = 1 to n do
                 atest ← πref (q) j ← πtea (q, atest , PC ) if j = 1 then
                       Add atest to A+ test ;
              else
                     Add atest to A−
                                   test ;

                         −
        Add (q, A+
                 test , Atest ) to Dcor-err ;
                        −
   foreach (q, A+
                test , Atest ) ∈ Dcor-err do
        Update πstu to minimize LDPO-self (θ)
   Output: Return the fine-tuned Student Model πstu ;
   return πstu



RawSFT adopts the standard knowledge distillation method to SFT of the stu-
dent model using the answers generated by the teacher. ThoughtSFT requires the
teacher model to generate knowledge chains. ThoughtDPO, AnswerDPO, and
ExpandDPO are teacher-guided DPO methods applied to ThoughtSFT. Specifi-
cally, ThoughtDPO adopts DPO, where the teacher generates correct answers for
incorrect answers without providing the original answers; AnswerDPO provides
the correct answers to the teacher; and ExpandDPO augments the dataset by gen-
erating three teacher answers for each incorrect answer. In contrast, SelfDPO
employs a self-improvement mechanism, where ThoughtSFT generates four an-
swers for each question, which are judged as correct-wrong answer pairs, all of
which are used for DPO training on SelfDPO. TemplateSFT is trained by intro-
ducing Chain of Thoughts (CoT) and example templates derived from the teacher
model in the SFT process. Finally, MedCritical is similar to SelfDPO, but uses
TemplateSFT, which leverages CoT templates, to generate four answers for im-
proving self-collaborative DPO.




                                                           10
4.2. Inter-Model Comparison and Analysis
    As shown in Table 1, our method achieves new SOTA performance among all
7B models on the CMExam benchmark. It significantly outperforms the strong
Taiyi by 4.16% and Huatuo-o1-7B by 11.24%. Notably, our best self-learning
model MedCritical even achieves superior results than QwQ-32B in this test. This
result establishes the MedCritical model as the leading performer in 7B-level
complex medical reasoning tasks. It demonstrates the effectiveness of our pro-
posed MedCritical framework in enhancing reasoning capabilities. We attribute
the improvement in reasoning accuracy to two aspects. The first CSFT stage pro-
vides LLM student models with a deeper and more fine-grained reasoning process.
Compared with the traditional reasoning process, it helps LLM student models
reason more meticulously, thereby improving the consistency of reasoning and
reducing the student model’s illusion of “misconception of its own capabilities”.
The second model self-DPO stage helps LLM student models break through the
reasoning limitations by comparing the model’s own correctness and errors and
trying to foster deeper reasoning paths, thereby helping LLM student models gain
skills and knowledge to solve problems encountered in partial problem solving.
These “partially or inconsistently solved” problems are the most important part
that students need to consolidate and improve.

                                                                          Test Sets
   ModelName                                BaseModel
                                                                 TRAIN TEST total
   MedCritical                     TemplateSFT                    68.17     71.29     70.62
   Taiyi                             Qwen-7B                      65.03     66.86     66.46
   Huatuo-o1-7B                    Qwen2.5-7B                     54.43     60.75     59.38
   DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B   Qwen2.5-Math-7B                  56.00     57.87     57.47
   Lingshu-7B                  Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct             46.40     48.89     48.35
   Baichuan2-7B-Chat            Baichuan2-7B-Base                 22.43     21.81     21.94
   Apollo2-7B                       Qwen2-7B                       9.60     13.70     12.81

Table 1: Performance comparison of MedCritical with other 7B models on the CMExam dataset,
demonstrating superior medical reasoning accuracy and state-of-the-art performance at 70.62%.



4.3. Intra-Model Ablation and Analysis
    We conduct an ablation study on the MedCritical model and list the results
in Table 2. The results show that compared with our CSFT model ThoughtSFT,


                                             11
                              MedCritical                    Taiyi            Huatuo-o1-7B
                              DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
                              Lingshu-7B                     Baichuan2-7B-Chat                 Apollo2-7B



                                                                             Result
                   80
                                                                71.29                              70.62
                        68.17                                        66.86
                             65.03                                                                      66.46
                                                                         60.75                              59.38
                   60                                                         57.87                              57.41
                                 54.4356.00




     Accuracy(%)
                                                                                  48.89                              48.35
                                          46.40


                   40


                                              22.43                                    21.81                             21.94
                   20
                                                                                           13.70                             12.81
                                                      9.60



                   0
                                 TrainingSet                                 TestSet                            Total
                                                                              Sets




Figure 2: Cross-model comparison of MedCritical against other 7B models on CMExam dataset,
showcasing superior medical reasoning accuracy and state-of-the-art performance at 70.62% in
complex reasoning tasks.


the improvement of traditional SFT is limited, and the accuracy rate lags behind
by 10.06%. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the first stage. Based on our
CSFT model ThoughtSFT, we further apply some DPO methods to compare with
one of our Self-DPO models, SelfDPO. The results show that our method achieves
higher accuracy than the ThoughtDPO model by 0.75%. This underscores the
effectiveness of the second stage. To better understand our two-stage method,
consider the example shown in the figure. The base model misunderstands the
characteristics of “dry pneumococcal meningitis” because it does not consider
the effect of reduced mucus in the lung membranes implied by dry pneumococcal
meningitis. After applying our long chain thinking reasoning template (denoted as
CTP) for training, we can see that the model identifies this factor. However, it fails
to correctly apply the impact of this fact on the patient’s lung pain to the model,


                                                                         12
which is precisely caused by the hallucination problem. Finally, our combined
one-two-stage model, MedCritical, successfully addresses this issue by accurately
understanding dry pneumococcal meningitis.

 Comparison of answers from three models
 What are the chest pain characteristics of dry pleurisy?

 Student: The chest pain associated with dry pleurisy is typically sharp, localized, and can be quite intense. It
 often feels like a stabbing sensation and is usually felt on one side of the chest, corresponding to the inflamed
 area of the pleura. This discomfort can be persistent and may significantly impact a person’s ability to move or
 take deep breaths comfortably. While the pain itself is a primary symptom, it can also be accompanied by other
 general symptoms such as a dry cough, mild fever, or a general feeling of malaise, making the overall experience
 quite uncomfortable for the individual.

   - Critique: This section presents the Student model’s response, which describes general symptoms but misses
 key pain patterns, indicating its limitation in medical reasoning.

 TemplateSFT: Chest pain stemming from dry pleurisy is characteristically sharp or stabbing in nature, often
 described as a “knife-like” sensation. A key feature of this pain is exacerbation with respiratory movements. It
 tends to significantly worsen when you inhale deeply, cough forcefully, sneeze, or even laugh, as these actions
 cause the chest wall and lungs to move. Conversely, patients often find that the pain lessens considerably, or may
 even temporarily disappear, when they hold their breath or take very shallow breaths. This distinct pattern of pain
 makes it a strong indicator of pleuritic involvement.

   - Critique: This section shows the TemplateSFT model’s response, correctly noting pain patterns but failing to
 explain the mechanism, indicating partial improvement.

 MedCritical: Dry pleurisy results in a distinctive, sharp, and often severe chest pain due to the underlying
 pathological mechanism. Normally, the two layers of the pleura—the visceral pleura covering the lungs and the
 parietal pleura lining the chest wall—are smooth and lubricated by a small amount of fluid, allowing them to
 glide effortlessly past each other during breathing. However, in dry pleurisy, inflammation causes these pleural
 surfaces to become rough and sticky, and the lubricating fluid may be diminished. Consequently, with each
 inhalation and exhalation, these inflamed, roughened surfaces rub directly against one another, creating intense
 friction. This friction is the direct cause of the sharp pain. When an individual holds his or her breath, the
 movement between these inflamed pleural layers is temporarily suspended, thereby eliminating the friction and
 providing a noticeable, albeit temporary, relief from the agonizing pain. This explains why the pain is so closely
 linked to the act of breathing.

   - Critique: This section displays the MedCritical model’s response, offering a detailed and accurate
 mechanism, demonstrating enhanced reasoning capability.

    The performance comparison in Table 2 yields some key findings. First, the
performance of ThoughtSFT based on classic CoT is significantly better than that
of RawSFT and Teacher models, with the overall accuracy increased from 58.47%
and 65.37% to 68.53%, which reflects the effectiveness of knowledge distillation.
Second, the performance of TemplateSFT based on long CoT template is further
improved to 69.09%, which is higher than RawSFT, indicating that adding long
thinking chain reasoning templates with examples can further enhance the model’s
reasoning ability. Third, three teacher-guided self-learning policy optimization
methods (ThoughtDPO, AnswerDPO, and ExpandDPO) slightly improve over


                                                        13
ThoughtSFT (68.53%) (68.75%, 69.06%, and 68.75%), but still lag behind Self-
DPO (69.50%), which highlights the advantage of our self-learning method in
mining error-driven insights. Finally, MedCritical achieves the highest accuracy
of 70.62%, outperforming SelfDPO and all other methods, which corroborates the
effectiveness of combining long CoT templates with self-collaborative DPO. We
qualitatively analyze the teacher-guided T-DPO model ExpandDPO and our Self-
DPO model MedCritical. For fairness, we choose the same parameter settings and
prompting methods for each model. As shown below, both perform more effec-
tive analysis based on the same problem. Considering their accuracies (68.75%
vs 70.62%), our method is more resource-efficient and enables more accurate rea-
soning compared to T-DPO, thus solving previously unsolvable problems.
 Comparison of responses from T-DPO and Self-DPO Model
 What are the chest pain characteristics of dry pleurisy?

 T-DPO: Dry pleurisy leads to sharp chest pain primarily because the usual lubrication between the two pleural
 layers is compromised. In a healthy state, a small amount of fluid allows the visceral and parietal pleura to glide
 smoothly. However, with dry pleurisy, this fluid may be reduced or absent, and the pleural surfaces become
 inflamed and sticky. Consequently, during inhalation and exhalation, these unlubricated, inflamed membranes
 come into direct, abrasive contact. This direct rubbing is the source of the severe pain, which is exacerbated by
 breathing. Holding one’s breath stops this abrasive contact, thus alleviating the pain.

 Self-DPO: Dry pleurisy results in a distinctive, sharp, and often severe chest pain due to the underlying
 pathological mechanism. Normally, the two layers of the pleura—the visceral pleura covering the lungs and the
 parietal pleura lining the chest wall—are smooth and lubricated by a small amount of fluid, allowing them to
 glide effortlessly past each other during breathing. However, in dry pleurisy, inflammation causes these pleural
 surfaces to become rough and sticky, and the lubricating fluid may be diminished. Consequently, with each
 inhalation and exhalation, these inflamed, roughened surfaces rub directly against one another, creating intense
 friction. This friction is the direct cause of the sharp pain. When an individual holds his or her breath, the
 movement between these inflamed pleural layers is temporarily suspended, thereby eliminating the friction and
 providing a noticeable, albeit temporary, relief from the agonizing pain. This explains why the pain is so closely
 linked to the act of breathing.



5. Conclusion
    This paper proposes a novel two-stage framework that can significantly im-
prove the reasoning ability of language models. We propose fine-tuning based
on long thought chain templates to enable LLM to produce more sophisticated
reasoning thinking, and introduce model self-collaborative DPO to improve the
reasoning ability of student LLM through self-correct confrontation on the same
problem. Experiments show that our method is superior to previous methods.
In the CMExam benchmark, our method is 4.16% more accurate than the strong
Taiyi and 11.24% higher than Huatuo-o1-7B. In future work, we will extend this
new framework to larger models and more complex datasets.


                                                        14
                                                                  Sets
                ModelName             BaseModel
                                                          Train   Test    Total
                Student     Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 47.57 52.81 51.68
                Teacher         QwQ-32B         59.07 67.52 65.37
                RawSFT           Student        55.37 59.33 58.47
                ThoughtSFT       Student        64.87 69.54 68.53
                ThoughtDPO     ThoughtSFT       62.43 70.49 68.75
                AnswerDPO      ThoughtSFT       63.63 70.56 69.06
                ExpandDPO      ThoughtSFT       64.27 69.98 68.75
                SelfDPO        ThoughtSFT       66.27 70.39 69.50
                TemplateSFT      Student        66.03 69.93 69.09
                MedCritical   TemplateSFT       68.17 71.29 70.62

Table 2: Performance comparison of student, teacher, and fine-tuned models across training, test,
and total sets, evaluating reasoning accuracy in ablation study.


6. Acknowledgements
   This research is funded by the FDUROP program of Fudan University (No.
24254) and supported by the CFFF computing platform.

References
 [1] P. F. Christiano, et al., Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2017).

 [2] L. Ouyang, et al., Training language models to follow instructions with hu-
     man feedback, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155 (2022). arXiv:2203.
     02155.

 [3] R. Rafailov, et al., Direct preference optimization: Your language model is
     secretly a reward model, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290 (2024). arXiv:
     2305.18290.

 [4] V. Lai, et al., Step-dpo: Step-wise preference optimization for long-chain
     reasoning of llms, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18629 (2024). arXiv:2406.
     18629.



                                               15
                                                  TrainSet                      TestSet                    Total
                  80



                                                                                              70.49            70.56                                                               71.2970.62
                                                                            69.54                                               69.98            70.39            69.93
                                                                                                   68.75            69.06            68.75            69.50            69.09
                  70                                                             68.53                                                                                         68.17
                                          67.52
                                                                                                                                             66.27            66.03
                                               65.37




    Accuracy(%)
                                                                        64.87                                               64.27
                                                                                                           63.63
                                                                                          62.43

                                      59.07                59.33
                  60                                            58.47
                                                       55.37
                         52.81
                              51.68
                  50 47.57




                  40
                       Student          Teacher          RawSFT         ThoughtSFT ThoughtDPO AnswerDPO ExpandDPO                              SelfDPO        TemplateSFT MedCritical
                                                                                                  ModelName




Figure 3: Self-comparison of MedCritical model with various fine-tuning and optimization meth-
ods, demonstrating improved reasoning accuracy across training and test sets in ablation study for
medical reasoning tasks.


 [5] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
     D. Zhou, et al., Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large lan-
     guage models, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35
     (2022) 24824–24837.
 [6] T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, Y. Iwasawa, Large language mod-
     els are zero-shot reasoners, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
     tems 35 (2022) 22199–22213.
 [7] O. Press, M. Zhang, S. Min, L. Schmidt, N. A. Smith, M. Lewis, Measuring
     and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models, Findings of
     the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 (2023) 5687–
     5711.
 [8] S. Arora, A. Narayan, M. F. Chen, L. Orr, N. Guha, K. Bhatia, I. Chami,
     C. Re, Ask me anything: A simple strategy for prompting language models,
     The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (2022).
 [9] D. Zhou, N. Schärli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans,
     C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. V. Le, et al., Least-to-most prompting enables com-
     plex reasoning in large language models, The Eleventh International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations (2022).

                                                                                                   16
[10] T. Khot, H. Trivedi, M. Finlayson, Y. Fu, K. Richardson, P. Clark, A. Sab-
     harwal, Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex
     tasks, The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations
     (2022).

[11] Z. Zhang, A. Zhang, M. Li, A. Smola, Automatic chain of thought prompting
     in large language models, The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
     ing Representations (2022).

[12] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. Griffiths, Y. Cao, K. Narasimhan,
     Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).

[13] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, M. Podstawski, L. Gian-
     inazzi, J. Gajda, T. Lehmann, H. Niewiadomski, P. Nyczyk, et al., Graph of
     thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models, Proceed-
     ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 38 (2024) 17682–
     17690.

[14] W. Chen, X. Ma, X. Wang, W. W. Cohen, Program of thoughts prompting:
     Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks,
     Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023).

[15] X. Ning, Z. Lin, Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Wang, Skeleton-of-thought:
     Large language models can do parallel decoding, The Twelfth International
     Conference on Learning Representations (2023).

[16] L. Yang, Z. Yu, T. Zhang, S. Cao, M. Xu, W. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, B. Cui,
     Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language mod-
     els, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024).

[17] G. Tyen, et al., Llms cannot find reasoning errors, but can correct them given
     the error location, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
     ACL 2024 (2024).




                                        17
