                                                                                      Page 1 of 37


Invited Review

Artificial Intelligence and Generative Models in Hepatology: From Large Language Models
to Digital Pathology in Liver Disease Diagnosis and Treatment



Short title: AI and Generative Models in Hepatology



Nana Peng1,2*, Mary Yue Wang1,2*, Sherlot Juan Song1,2*, Jimmy Che-To Lai1,2,3, Vicki Wing-Ki
Hui1,2, Vincent Wai-Sun Wong1,2, Grace Lai-Hung Wong1,2, Mamatha Bhat4^, Terry Cheuk-Fung
Yip1,2,3^

* N Peng, MY Wang, and SJ Song shared co-first authorship.

^ M Bhat and TCF Yip shared co-corresponding authorship.

1
    Medical Data Analytics Centre, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

2
    State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

3
    Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

4
    Ajmera Transplant Centre, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.



Co-Correspondence:

Mamatha Bhat, MSc, MD, PhD

Ajmera Transplant Centre, University Health Network, 585 University Ave, Toronto, ON M5G
2N2, Canada

Phone: 1 416-581-7512

Email: mamatha.bhat@uhn.ca
                                                                                        Page 2 of 37


Terry Yip, PhD

Medical Data Analytic Center, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales
Hospital, 30-32 Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, Hong Kong, China

Phone: 852 3503 1298

Email: tcfyip@cuhk.edu.hk

Keywords: digital pathology, generative artificial intelligence, large language models, retrieval-

augmented generation

Text word counts: 4,968

Number of tables: 1

Number of figures: 3

Funding: None declared.

Disclosures: Jimmy Lai has served as an advisory committee member for Gilead Sciences and
Boehringer Ingelheim, and a speaker for Gilead Sciences. Vincent Wong served as a consultant or
advisor for AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Echosens, Eli Lilly, Gilead Sciences,
Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Roche Diagnostics, and TARGET PharmaSolutions; a
speaker for Abbott, AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Echosens, Gilead Sciences, and Novo Nordisk; an
independent non-executive director for Furui; and a co-founder of Illuminatio Medical Technology.
He has received a research grant from Gilead Sciences. Grace Wong has served as an advisory
committee member for AstraZeneca, Gilead Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals and
Janssen, and as a speaker for Abbott, AbbVie, Ascletis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Echosens, Gilead
Sciences, Janssen, and Roche. She has also received a research grant from Gilead Sciences.
Mamatha Bhat has received investigator-initiated grants from Novo Nordisk, Merck, Paladin,
Roche, Eisai, Natera, and AstraZeneca. Terry Yip has served as an advisory committee member
for Altimmune, Gilead Sciences, and GSK, and as a speaker for Echosens and Gilead Sciences.
The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author Contributions: All authors were responsible for the writing plan, content, drafting, and
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
                                                                                          Page 3 of 37


Acknowledgement: During the preparation of this manuscript, the authors used ChatGPT
(OpenAI GPT-5.5) to assist with language refinement, improve clarity, and presentation. All AI-
assisted content was critically reviewed and revised by the authors, who take full responsibility for
the accuracy and integrity of the final manuscript.
                                                                                          Page 4 of 37


Abstract

Artificial intelligence (AI), particularly foundation and generative models, is reshaping the practice

of hepatology through enhanced knowledge synthesis, quantitative and reproducible analysis of

multimodal data, and personalized clinical decision support. This narrative review examines the

transition from task-specific discrimination AI to large language models (LLMs), multimodal

foundation models, and agentic AI. We synthesize evidence from original and validation studies,

clinical evaluations, and benchmark studies, as well as expert reviews and regulatory frameworks

across metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease, chronic hepatitis B, cirrhosis and

portal hypertension, hepatocellular carcinoma, and liver transplantation. LLMs can convert free-

text notes into structured data, summarize longitudinal electronic health records, support patient

education, and retrieve guideline-based information. Retrieval-augmented generation and agentic

AI may improve traceability and workflow support, but current evidence is largely retrospective

or proof-of-concept. In digital pathology and imaging, discriminative AI has enabled more

quantitative and reproducible histologic scoring and biomarker analysis. Pathology and

multimodal foundation models offer transferable representations, report generation, and cross-

modal reasoning, but hepatology-specific validation remains limited. Key risks include

hallucination, automation bias, domain shift across centers and devices, and inequities due to

under-representation of patient subgroups. We outline the future directions for safe AI model

deployment based on multimodal foundation models, prospective and federated evaluation,

lifecycle governance, and continuous monitoring for performance, calibration, and equity. Most

generative AI applications in hepatology remain at the proof-of-concept stage, and rigorous

prospective validation with human-in-the-loop oversight is required before clinical integration.
                                                                                           Page 5 of 37


Introduction

In hepatology, clinical decision-making requires meticulous use of longitudinal laboratory

trajectories, virological markers, imaging, endoscopy, histology, comorbid metabolic risk and

medications, and evolving guidelines to manage metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver

disease (MASLD), chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV), cirrhosis and portal hypertension,

hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and liver transplantation. Increasing multimorbidity and

expanding indications for non‑invasive tests, surveillance, and therapeutic options make

individualized care more complex, particularly across multidisciplinary teams.1 Hepatology

continues to face important unmet needs, including earlier advanced fibrosis detection, scalable

risk‑stratification tools, more reproducible clinical trial endpoints, and effective patient education,

all within a setting of limited workforce and resources.




Generative artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged at a time when both data volume and clinical

expectations are increasing. Breakthroughs in transformer architectures, self‑supervised

pretraining, and scalable computation have produced state-of-the-art foundation models.

Foundation models are large-scale pretrained neural networks that acquire general-purpose

representations and can subsequently be adapted to downstream applications with minimal task-

specific supervision via fine-tuning or prompting.2 In particular, large language models (LLMs)

can transform free‑text notes into structured variables, summarize longitudinal records, and link

patient presentation to evidence and guidelines via retrieval‑augmented generation (RAG). Vision

foundation models move beyond manual feature pipelines toward scalable, generalizable encoders

that support quantitative histology, biomarker discovery, and multimodal reasoning across slides

and reports.
                                                                                         Page 6 of 37




Earlier discriminative AI have shown strong performance in focused hepatology tasks, such as

predicting fibrosis stage or HCC risk.3-6 These models are usually developed for narrowly defined

tasks, depend on task-specific labels, and often show limited generalizability across clinical

settings, imaging platforms, pathology workflows, and patient populations.7 Generative AI and

foundation models offer a broader framework for integrating longitudinal, multimodal, and often

fragmented data in hepatology. Through self-supervised pretraining on large-scale heterogeneous

datasets, generative models enable more flexible learning across multimodal clinical inputs and

may reduce key limitations of discriminative AI, including their reliance on expert-labelled data

and narrow, task-specific representations. Still, broader pretraining does not guarantee

generalizability, and performance must be externally validated across clinical settings, data

platforms, workflows, and patient populations before implementation. At the same time, the

complexity and high-stakes nature of hepatology expose key limitations of generative AI,

including hallucination, inherent bias from training corpora, domain shift, and poor traceability of

unsupported recommendations. Therefore, the outputs of generative models must be interpretable,

traceable to evidence, and validated across diverse patient populations before clinical

implementation.




This review provides a focused summary of AI and generative models in hepatology, moving

beyond prior reviews of conventional discriminative models to examine the emerging paradigm of

generative models. Discriminative AI is discussed, illustrating the transition from task-specific

prediction models to foundation models and generative AI approaches. By integrating applications

and highlighting evolving frameworks such as RAG and AI agents, we aim to contextualize
                                                                                          Page 7 of 37


generative AI within real-world hepatology workflows. This narrative review synthesizes evidence

across MASLD/metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH), chronic hepatitis B,

cirrhosis and portal hypertension, HCC, and liver transplantation, highlighting current applications

and remaining gaps in AI and generative models. We further emphasize the unique challenges of

hepatology and outline key requirements for translating rapid technical advances into safe,

equitable, and clinically meaningful impact.




Fundamentals of generative AI and foundation models

Unlike discriminative AI, which predicts labels for existing data, generative AI models the

underlying probability distribution of data itself, synthesizing coherent outputs that follow the

original data distributions. Especially, LLMs exhibit emergent intelligence benefits from scaling

laws, unlocking new levels of performance and generalization in clinical applications.8




Generative AI development in medicine transforms general-purpose knowledge into specialized,

clinically actionable intelligence (Figure 1). This pipeline involves pretraining foundation models

on massive datasets, domain adaptation through fine-tuning, and reinforcement learning from

human feedback (RLHF), downstream tailoring using techniques such as prompt engineering or

RAG.9-11 Lastly, embedding the generative models within an agentic AI framework enables

autonomous, goal-directed clinical reasoning, allowing AI agents to plan, execute, and iterate over

complex tasks by interacting with external tools and data sources.12
                                                                                          Page 8 of 37


LLMs built upon the transformer architecture use self-attention to capture long-range

dependencies across input sequences.13 Reasoning models, including GPT-5, DeepSeek-R1 and

Gemini 3, exhibit multi-step inference and complex instruction following,14,15 making them a

central component of agentic AI systems. Figure 2 shows the co-evolution of general LLMs and

domain-specific medical models. Benchmark evaluations reported that general-purpose LLM,

GPT-4, achieved over 90% accuracy on MedQA benchmark derived from the United States

medical licensing examination.16 Continual pretraining on large-scale medical domain corpora

developed medical foundation LLMs, such as Me-LLaMA and Med-PaLM 2.17,18 Alternatively,

some medical foundation models are trained from scratch on massive biomedical text to more

deeply embed medical expertise (e.g., PubMedBERT, NYUTron).19,20 These medical foundation

LLMs outperformed general-purpose LLMs on domain tasks, matching expert-level human

performance on task-specific datasets.21




Vision-language models (VLMs) jointly process and generate visual and textual clinical

information, comprising a vision encoder for extracting image features, an LLM decoder for text

generation, and a cross-modal alignment module. They support image captioning, visual question

answering, and text-to-image generation.22 An evolution from discriminative to generative AI in

digital pathology has been observed. Targeted at narrowly specific tasks, such as tumor detection,

grading, and tissue segmentation, deep learning models (convolutional neural networks [CNNs],

and vision transformers [ViTs]) trained using supervised learning strategy have achieved high

accuracy.23,24 However, these models lack generalizability to different diseases or tissue types, and

the training data commonly requires extensive manual annotation. In contrast, self-supervised

pretraining on large-scale, unlabeled whole-slide images has produced pathology foundation
                                                                                        Page 9 of 37


models, such as UNI, Virchow2, which learned transferable visual representations across diverse

tissue types, staining protocols, and scanning platforms, and showed strong performance across a

variety of downstream retrospective tasks and benchmarks.25 Moreover, multimodal pathology

foundation models align whole-slide images with clinical text and pathology reports, enabling

conversational cross-modal interaction, for example, text-prompt slides retrieval, abnormality

localization, and pathology report generation.26,27




Although foundation models have demonstrated broad capabilities in text generation, image

analysis, and multimodal reasoning, most supporting evidence remains benchmark-based,

retrospective, or derived from general biomedical tasks. Hepatology-specific evidence is still

limited, particularly for prospective, real-world validation and clinical outcomes assessment.




AI agent and clinical decision support system

Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) bridge the clinical observations (e.g., electronic health

records [EHRs]) and clinical knowledge at the point of care. Powered by LLMs, particularly

reasoning models, AI agents may drive a transformative advance in clinical decision support.28,29




AI agents can be characterized by the following key features.12 First, environmental perception;

through natural language processing (NLP) and application programming interface (API) calls, the

agent can understand and interpret its operating environment, including user inputs, multimodal

clinical data, dynamic data streams (e.g., physiological monitoring), and outputs from external

tools. Second, reasoning and planning; under user-defined clinical objectives, LLMs synthesize
                                                                                        Page 10 of 37


patient data with medical knowledge and up-to-date evidence-based guidelines and perform multi-

level clinical reasoning and task planning. Third, action; the agent can automatically use tools and

be deeply engaged in clinical workflows, such as triggering risk alerts, generating diagnoses and

treatment recommendations, scheduling examinations, and dynamically updating follow-up plans.

Lastly, reflection and iteration; utilizing real-world evidence, for example, adoption rates of

clinical recommendations and patient outcomes, as well as reinforcement learning strategy, the

agent can dynamically refine its inherent decision-making logic and continuously calibrate and

evolve itself during clinical practice. Consequently, AI agents may extend traditional rule-based

CDSS by supporting more flexible information synthesis, guideline retrieval, task coordination,

and clinical workflow assistance.




Early proof-of-concept studies reported promising performance of AI agents in selected clinical

tasks.30 In an oncology setting, Ferber et al. developed an AI agent powered by GPT-4,

autonomously orchestrated segmentation models, pathology foundation models, external tools

(calculators and web search), and RAG to generate evidence-based evaluations supporting clinical

decision-making. Among 20 gastrointestinal oncology cases, including HCC, the agent used tools

with 87.5% accuracy, and generated correct clinical conclusions in 91.0% of cases.31 These

performances should be interpreted cautiously, as they were derived from only 20 curated cases

without external validation.




LLM-based AI agents demonstrated promising benefits for patient education and self-management

by supporting care instructions.32 Studies reported that LLM-based AI agents accurately answer
                                                                                         Page 11 of 37


patients’ questions over 90% of the time, covering complications, treatment, and common

inquiries.33,34 Another study found that 4 LLMs outperformed web-based forum users in answering

laboratory test-related questions.35 Among cancer patients, LLMs can also support their self-

management through emotional, informational, and motivational assistance.36




Several barriers hinder real‑world clinical use of AI agents. First, existing evaluation benchmarks

and metrics emphasize classification accuracy and automated technical metrics, offering limited

insight into the performance of generative outputs on clinical tasks.37,38 Evaluation frameworks

tailored to generative outputs remain underdeveloped for medicine and are even scarcer in

hepatology.39 Second, the inherent hallucination is another concern, wherein LLMs can generate

plausible but factually incorrect content.40 This affects different aspects, including but not limited

to fabricated references, incorrect staging or treatment recommendations, and automation bias. A

recent reference-integrity audit of 2.5 million biomedical papers found that the fabrication rate was

more than 12 times greater in 2025 than that in 2023.41 A study of 104 prompts showed that the

rate of hallucinated treatment recommendations from ChatGPT-3.5 ranged from 5% to 25% in

different cancer types.42 The risk of hallucination is amplified by automation bias, in which

clinicians defer to confident but erroneous machine outputs. A randomized clinical trial

introducing deliberate errors in ChatGPT-4o’s suggestions for physicians trained in AI literacy

showed a reduction in accuracy of 14% compared to the error-free suggestion group, suggesting

substantial automation bias when exposed to erroneous LLM recommendations.43 Mitigation

strategies are required, including mandatory citation verification, human-in-the-loop confirmation

for high-risk recommendations, and prospective post-deployment safety monitoring. Third, like

discriminative AI, generative AI is also susceptible to bias from its training data, including the
                                                                                       Page 12 of 37


underrepresentation of minority populations and rare diseases, undermining reliability and equity.

Understanding sources of AI bias in clinical scenarios enables a proactive approach to mitigate its

effect.44 All these aspects pose a critical safety concern given the high-stakes nature of medical

decision-making in hepatology. However, early evidence indicates that domain‑specific

fine‑tuning and RAG grounded in hepatology guidelines can improve factuality and task

performance, suggesting a practical pathway toward safer deployment.18,45




RAG is particularly relevant to hepatology because many clinical decisions depend on rapidly

evolving guidelines, local protocols, and patient-specific longitudinal data. In a RAG workflow,

an LLM retrieves relevant information from trusted sources, including society clinical guidelines,

institutional HCC surveillance protocols, transplant program manuals, or prior similar cases, and

generates evidence-based responses. Exploratory studies proposed preliminary LLM frameworks

in liver diseases using RAG and guidelines. Ge et al. developed LiVersa, an LLM using RAG and

guidelines from the American Association for the Study of the Liver (AASLD), while Kresevic et

al. integrated hepatitis C virus (HCV) guidelines using RAG into CDSS to support treatment

recommendations for HCV patients.9,45 However, these performances were reported based on a

few expert-drafted clinical cases, and more rigorous evaluations are required. In a hepatology RAG

system, curated knowledge bases, version control of guidelines, and source citation are important

to ensure the accuracy and usefulness in practice.




Applications in MASLD/MASH (Figure 3)

AI‑assisted scoring of liver histology in MASH
                                                                                        Page 13 of 37


Traditionally, pathologists have scored various features of liver histology on a semiquantitative

scale to facilitate comparisons across studies and the interpretation of clinical trials.46 This

approach has gained prominence with drug development for MASH, as both the U.S. Food and

Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) have accepted

histological responses, specifically the resolution of MASH and improvements in fibrosis, at

interim analyses as the basis for considering a drug for accelerated approval.47




To demonstrate these histological responses, clinical trials need to enroll a narrow spectrum of

patients with “at-risk” MASH, defined as the presence of MASH (with a MASLD activity score

of 4 or higher, including at least 1 point each in steatosis, lobular inflammation, and hepatocyte

ballooning) alongside F2-F3 fibrosis. These requirements have created substantial challenges in

drug development. One key issue is the very low intrarater and interrater agreement in histological

assessments, which is particularly poor for ballooning—unfortunately, a defining feature of

MASH. Consequently, two pathologists may disagree on whether a patient is eligible for a clinical

trial or whether they have achieved a histological response. In a secondary analysis of the

EMMINENCE study, 46% of patients deemed eligible by one pathologist were considered not

eligible by one or more other pathologists.48 Importantly, when two serial biopsies were evaluated,

the interrater variability was compounded, resulting in kappa values as low as around 0.4 for both

MASH resolution and fibrosis improvement.




To mitigate this problem, current clinical trials typically involve histological assessments

conducted by at least two pathologists, with a third pathologist consulted in the case of discrepant
                                                                                     Page 14 of 37


results. Although this approach improves consistency to some extent, the need for histological

evaluations by multiple pathologists and the efforts involved in resolving discrepancies further

increase the cost and time required for drug development.




Imaging analysis is at the forefront of AI applications in medicine. Several platforms, including

PathAI, Histoindex, FibroNest, and MorphoQuant, have already demonstrated superior

reproducibility and accuracy in scoring histology compared to human pathologists.49 These

platforms utilize scanned images of stained slides as well as second harmonic generation/two-

photon excitation on unstained slides. The latter approach can theoretically further reduce

variability introduced during staining; however, head-to-head comparisons among these platforms

are largely lacking.




Regulatory qualification of AIM-MASH

In 2025, AIM-MASH (formerly AIM-NASH by PathAI) became the first AI tool qualified by the

U.S. FDA under the Drug Development Tool Qualification programmes and EMA under the

Qualification Options of novel methodologies for medicine development to evaluate the

histological severity of MASH in clinical trials, based on secondary analyses of clinical trial

data.23,50-53AIM-MASH demonstrated comparable accuracy to consensus scoring by human

pathologists for histological activity and fibrosis stage, while showing significantly higher

consistency. Unlike the ordinal Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network scoring

system, AIM-MASH scores each histological feature on a continuous scale, providing more

granular data that highlights changes often missed by the crude ordinal scale.
                                                                                     Page 15 of 37




Despite this exciting development, several key questions remain. Firstly, no studies have yet

demonstrated that AI combined with human consensus scoring is superior to AI alone. It raises the

question of whether clinical trials still require liver biopsies to be evaluated by multiple

pathologists. If human pathologists do not enhance scoring accuracy, their role may shift to

excluding unexpected concomitant liver diseases, a task that AI could potentially also handle in

the future.




Secondly, while model refinement is common in AI, regulatory approval typically relies on a

“finalized” model. Regulators have indicated that major changes could necessitate further

qualification, but defining what constitutes a “major change” is still pending.




Thirdly, the field should not be dominated by a single model. Multiple AI digital pathology

platforms will likely emerge, making cross-platform comparisons essential. Moreover, while AI

can detect smaller changes in histology,54 defining what constitutes clinically meaningful

improvement remains critical.




Finally, since current AI platforms are trained against the imperfect reference of human

histological scoring, pursuing unbiased model training using clinical outcomes as the reference

standard may yield more reliable tools.55,56
                                                                                        Page 16 of 37


Physics-aware imaging AI in MASLD/MASH

Although biopsy remains a histological gold standard, its invasive nature and susceptibility to

sampling error preclude its routine use in all patients with MASLD/MASH. Non-invasive imaging

remains of critical clinical importance. A growing body of literature now explores the utility of

physics-aware imaging AI mapping quantitative biomarkers to enhance these modalities. The main

strength of this physics-aware AI paradigm is that known physical principles, such as MRI signal

generation, X-ray scattering simulations, and energy conservation laws, can be incorporated

directly into AI, enhancing models’ scientific consistency, generalization, and interpretability, as

well as their superior performance in terms of resolution and speed.57




In ultrasonography (US), applications diverge between physics-aware quantitative ultrasound

(QUS) and B-mode image analysis. Pedro et al. applied a deep learning algorithm to B-mode US

to detect and grade steatosis, achieving performance comparable to radiologists.58 Similarly, AI-

enhanced QUS techniques demonstrated high agreement with magnetic resonance imaging proton

density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF),59,60 indicating an expanding role for this primary, accessible

modality in the assessment of MASLD. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI have achieved

methodological maturity. Utilizing hepatosplenic attenuation derived from deep learning, a

contrast-enhanced volumetric CT tool displayed satisfactory performance in categorized

assessment of hepatic steatosis,61 showing its potential in opportunistic steatosis assessment. CT

and MRI employ deep learning and radiomic methods for automated organ segmentation, which

facilitates hepatic volumetry and improves reproducibility of biomarkers.62 The application of AI-

facilitated MRI for PDFF and R2* quantification has also been validated, with a strong correlation

with magnetic resonance spectroscopy,63 confirming its robustness for hepatic fat and iron
                                                                                        Page 17 of 37


quantification. However, before clinical translation, this technology warrants external validation

across different devices and populations, as well as refined harmonization of acquisition

parameters.




Applications in chronic HBV infection

Chronic HBV care draws on serial laboratory parameters, medication history, diagnostic and

procedural codes, family and psychosocial history.64 While a significant portion of this data is

stored as structured datasets, some clinical information is documented as free-text medical notes.

LLMs, exemplified by ChatGPT-3.5, have been shown to outperform two conventional NLP

methods65 in extracting pathological classifications from unstructured pathology notes with 89%

overall accuracy.66 Such promising findings support the feasibility of using LLMs to transform

unstructured healthcare data into structured formats, enhancing data analytics and research

capability, ultimately contributing to improved risk prediction, informed clinical decision-making,

and effective allocation of healthcare resources.20 LLMs tailored for medical language can be fine-

tuned for a variety of clinical and operational predictive tasks. These include, but are not limited

to, significant clinical outcomes such as hepatic events, HCC, mortality, readmission rates, and

length of hospital stay.




LLMs may also improve the efficiency of clinical operations by enabling clinical text

summarization and timely delivery of relevant information to the appropriate healthcare providers

within clinical care workflow. Clinical text summarization derived from EHRs facilitates the

streamlining of various tasks, including radiology reports, patient inquiries, progress notes, and
                                                                                       Page 18 of 37


doctor–patient dialogues. Summaries generated by LLMs are comparable to, and in some cases

exceeding, the quality of summaries produced by medical experts, without introducing an

increased risk of summarization errors that could potentially result in adverse medical outcomes.21

Accurate interpretation and subsequent integration of clinical guidelines through LLMs into

clinical management systems enhances the effectiveness of executing guidelines in daily clinical

practice.9




To date, HBV-specific generative AI evidence remains sparse. Important clinical questions in

chronic HBV, including HCC and decompensation prediction, interpretation of quantitative

HBsAg, HBV DNA, or RNA trajectories, antiviral treatment monitoring, and reactivation risk

during immunosuppression, still rely mainly on conventional risk scores or discriminative machine

learning based on structured EHR. For generative AI to add value in HBV care, future studies

should integrate laboratory trajectories, antiviral exposure, family history, imaging, fibrosis

assessment, and guidelines, and should be externally validated in Asian and other HBV-endemic

populations.




Applications in cirrhosis and portal hypertension

Multiple studies focused on the adoption of traditional discriminative AI for the diagnosis of

cirrhosis and portal hypertension, which mitigates the need for invasive procedures such as liver

biopsy and hepatic venous pressure gradient measurement in making the diagnosis. Using

multimodal parameters, including clinical and radiomics data, enables the identification of

gastroesophageal varices and clinically significant portal hypertension, as well as the prediction
                                                                                        Page 19 of 37


of hepatic decompensation and liver-related mortality.67,68 Generative AI in this area is relatively

confined to the diagnosis of cirrhosis. Several retrospective or exploratory studies have examined

the use of LLMs in cirrhosis-related tasks. One retrospective study evaluated GPT-4 for

determining whether cirrhosis and its complications were the cause of hospitalization, and the

results suggested that GPT-4 with zero-shot prompts had a robust accuracy of 88-99% for the

identification of cirrhosis and its complications, with chart review being considered the gold

standard.69 This enhanced the identification of appropriate cohorts from purely diagnosis code-

based classification and potentially served as a standard where a labor-intensive chart review may

be unnecessary. Beyond cohort identification, another comparative evaluation study assessed four

LLMs (ChartGPT-4o, Claude-3.5 Sonnet, Gemini-1.5Pro, and Llama-3.1) in responding to

questions related to cirrhosis, and found that all models were comprehensive with the generated

answers, and that they carried self-correction ability to improve the accuracy of initial answers

with simple prompts.70 Though an earlier exploratory study showed that the performance of LLMs

(using ChatGPT-3.5 as the tool) may differ in answering different domains of questions, such as

poorer performance in preventive medicine and specifying certain treatment durations.71

Nonetheless, LLMs may help identify patients with cirrhosis and its complications for better risk

stratification in clinical practice and cohort identification in research. The role of LLMs in

developing patient educational materials on cirrhosis and portal hypertension has also been shown,

and this may assist in the clinical care for patients with cirrhosis.72 Further studies focusing on

acute-on-chronic liver failure risk prediction and multimodal prediction of decompensation,

particularly through the integration of hemodynamic measurements, radiomics, and clinical data,

will be required to advance the use of generative AI in cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
                                                                                        Page 20 of 37


Generative AI and Drug Discovery for Liver Fibrosis

Drug development in hepatology, particularly for liver fibrosis, has been hindered by complex

disease biology, limited translational models, and historically high clinical-trial failure rates.

Heterogeneous metabolic, inflammatory, and regenerative pathways also complicate target

identification and validation.



LLM-driven “co-scientist” systems can synthesize biomedical literature, integrate multimodal

biological data, and generate mechanistic hypotheses at scale. They can iteratively propose, refine,

and prioritize therapeutic targets and identify opportunities for drug repurposing.73 Hepatology

provided early evidence of biological validation. A Gemini-based multi-agent co-scientist system

identified epigenetic targets that were assessed in multi-lineage human hepatic organoids, where

they suppressed fibrosis and promoted liver regeneration.74 This illustrates an early closed-loop

workflow integrating AI-generated hypotheses with experimental testing.



AI-generated hypotheses still require rigorous experimental and clinical validation, with

safeguards against bias, poor reproducibility, and overinterpretation of associative findings.

Future work should focus on integrating generative AI with high-quality biological models and

prospective validation frameworks to translate these advances into clinically effective therapies.




Applications in HCC

Digital pathology of HCC has been studied, spanning from lesion diagnosis and characterization

to biomarker prediction and prognostication.75 Using different AI modalities, such as deep learning
                                                                                       Page 21 of 37


on whole-slide images, HCC can be differentiated from other liver pathologies, such as dysplastic

nodules or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, with high diagnostic performance.76,77 Despite

heterogeneity in methodologies across studies, most reported an accuracy and AUROC >80%

using pathomics in distinguishing key histological features, such as tumor differentiation and

microvascular invasion, which can be subjective and prone to interobserver variability among

pathologists.78-81 With available data from resectable to unresectable HCC receiving

immunotherapy, the ability of pathomics alone or in combination with clinical parameters to

predict therapeutic response and recurrence has also been suggested, though the accuracy and

AUROC (0.6-0.9) vary across studies.82-85 Moreover, using pathomics to build CNNs allows

identification of genetic mutations from histopathology slides, facilitating future development in

precision oncology.79,86




Generative multimodal models, such as VLMs, have also been explored. A multicenter

retrospective study in China utilized preoperative radiological imaging to develop HepaPathGPT,

which exhibited robust tumor segmentation (mean Intersection over Union 0.883 ± 0.007; Dice

0.934 ± 0.006) and accuracy of 0.697 ± 0.024 for six pathological markers. It allowed generation

of structured pathology reports to provide a real-time, non-invasive pathological prediction.85




Generative AI may also support clinical decision-making for HCC, but careful validation,

workflow integration, and safeguards against hallucinations and bias are essential.87 Yang et al.

compared LLM-based treatment recommendations for untreated HCC with physician decisions

and guideline-based strategies in real-world registry data.88 This study reported low overall
                                                                                         Page 22 of 37


concordance (26.8-32.7%). Concordance was associated with better survival only in early-stage

HCC and with worse survival in advanced-stage disease, suggesting that LLMs should remain

supervised adjuncts for relatively straightforward, guideline-concordant scenarios.




Applications in liver transplantation

Generative AI solutions have been developed to enable personalized clinical decision support

along the liver transplant journey, from pre- to post-transplant.89 Important steps along this journey

include referral for transplant, evaluation for transplantation, discussions around candidacy, donor-

recipient matching, and post-transplant care. Generative AI solutions have been proposed to help

both transplant clinicians and patients along their journey.




ChatGPT has been examined for patient questions during the transplant journey, which is paved

by significant uncertainty and anxiety.90 Among 1,281 AI-generated responses to patient inquiries,

although 95.3% of patient users reported a high degree of satisfaction, response accuracy was only

80%, suggesting the necessity of RAG grounded in guidelines and local transplant program

manuals.91 A LLM framework was developed by Robitschek et al. to extract social determinants

of health and psychosocial risk factors contributing to disparities in access to liver

transplantation.92 These factors collectively accounted for 94.6% of the differences in access to

transplant seen.
                                                                                        Page 23 of 37


Transplantation candidacy decisions can be inconsistent, affected by recency bias, and swayed by

the loudest voice in the room. Hasjim et al. developed a multi-agentic framework based on a

national retrospective cohort, with each agent representing different experts on the committee (AI

hepatologist, AI transplant surgeon, AI social worker, and AI cardiologist) reviewing over 8,400

candidates for liver transplantation and arriving at a consensus decision around acceptance versus

decline for transplant.93 This decision was accompanied by a rationale, and using cosine similarity

analysis for each AI agent, they were able to delineate the factors that impacted each agent’s

decision. The consensus decision of the multi-agentic committee was 92% accurate in predicting

patients who would derive a 1-year survival post-transplant, representing the appropriateness of

patient acceptance for transplantation. Although this work is still a proof of concept, it paves the

way for future implementation of a multi-agentic framework for more objective decision-making

along the transplant patient journey.




Future Directions: Multimodal, federated, and real‑world evaluation

The more decisive issue in generative AI in hepatology is the data reality. Clinical decisions

integrate EHR history, laboratory trajectories, ultrasound, CT or MRI, endoscopy, histology, and

sometimes omics. Yet complete cross-modality datasets are uncommon. Endoscopy and

ultrasound data are inconsistently archived, and radiology protocols vary across centers. Models

trained on narrow or single-center data may therefore be fragile.94




Multimodal foundation models offer a plausible solution. Pretraining on large, partially observed

datasets can learn reusable representations that support several downstream tasks. In hepatology,
                                                                                         Page 24 of 37


these may include surveillance triage, fibrosis progression prediction, prognosis, treatment

response, and trial matching. Reusing fewer core models may also simplify updating and auditing,

and improve consistency across related endpoints.




Generalization is limited by cross-center heterogeneity, fragmented infrastructure, population

imbalance, scarce benchmarks, and restrictions on centralized data pooling.95 Federated and swarm

learning enable joint training while keeping patient-level data local, but they do not correct biased

sampling. In hepatology, representativeness should be assessed against the intended population

and use case, accounting for variation in viral etiology, disease stage, ancestry and geography,

scanner and staining protocols, and clinical setting. Although pathology foundation models such

as UNI and Virchow2 were pretrained on large, heterogeneous datasets, published studies do not

establish adequate representation of Asian or HBV-associated populations. This evidence gap is

particularly important for HBV-associated HCC because models developed or calibrated in

populations with different etiologies and risk profiles may not transfer reliably. Equity should also

be prespecified because models developed on biased samples can reduce generalizability and

perpetuate disparities.96




Evaluation has to match the stakes. Retrospective discrimination is not enough for models used

across sites and over time. Prospective multicenter validation should assess calibration, clinical

utility, human-AI interaction, and risk-of-bias appraisal, as well as patient outcomes, workflow

efficiency, and costs.97,98 Transparent and reproducible reporting should follow the emerging

frameworks, including transparent reporting of a multivariable model for individual prognosis or
                                                                                          Page 25 of 37


diagnosis (TRIPOD)-LLM for studies developing or evaluating LLMs,99 the standard protocol

items: recommendations for interventional trials (SPIRIT)-AI extension, and consolidated

standards of reporting trials (CONSORT)-AI for prospective clinical trials of AI

interventions.100,101 Embedding these frameworks would help move hepatology from ad hoc

adoption toward accountable, auditable clinical deployment.




Achieving trustworthy, accessible, and well-integrated AI systems also requires lifecycle

governance. Performance can change as patient mix, practice patterns, and data quality evolve.

Ongoing monitoring is necessary, and concise summaries such as model cards can support clinical

oversight. This lifecycle governance should be anchored to existing regulatory instruments. For

example, the U.S. FDA’s predetermined change control plan (PCCP) framework provides a

mechanism to pre-specify permissible modifications and validation;102 the European Union AI Act

classifies AI systems by risk, emphasizes risk management, data governance, transparency, and

human oversight, and imposes corresponding legal obligations.103 Accountability should also

remain explicit as AI-enabled decision support disperses influence across vendors, cloud providers,

hospitals, regulators, and clinicians, particularly as systems become more autonomous.




Conclusions

A practical roadmap of generative AI implementation begins by prioritizing use cases that tackle

current bottlenecks, including cohort identification, registry automation, decision support aligned

with clinical guidelines, reproducible histology endpoints in trials, and scalable surveillance triage.

For each use case, the intended user, hepatologist, pathologist, radiologist, or allied clinician, and
                                                                                         Page 26 of 37


clinical setting should be explicitly defined, because a tool embedded in a point-of-care workflow

demands different design, latency, and explainability than one supporting retrospective review or

multidisciplinary tumor board deliberation. The next step is to align data governance, privacy

safeguards, and the regulatory context of use with the intended deployment. Systems should be

engineered for safety by design. They should use RAG over trusted local sources, communicate

uncertainty clearly, restrict permissions for tool use, and enable human‑in‑the‑loop escalation for

critical decisions.




Prospective evaluation should assess discrimination, calibration, bias, robustness across centers

and devices, workflow effects, patient-reported outcomes, and health-economic endpoints.

Successful deployment also requires multidisciplinary teams that include hepatologists, liver

transplant and oncology specialists, pathologists, radiologists, nurses, data scientists, and medical

ethicists with hospital information technology and governance. These teams should define

accountability and maintain model documentation and post-market surveillance.




Impact and safety should be monitored using pre‑specified metrics, including errors prevented,

time saved, equity gaps, and clinical outcomes improvement. Teams should also define “stop rules”

for unacceptable failures. With rigorous measurement and shared stewardship, generative AI can

augment clinical expertise, reduce unwarranted variation, and improve liver-disease care.
                                                                                            Page 27 of 37


References

1.    Friedman SL, Sanyal AJ. The future of hepatology. Hepatology 2023;78:637–648.
2.    Teo ZL, Thirunavukarasu AJ, Elangovan K, Cheng H, Moova P, Soetikno B, et al. Generative
      artificial intelligence in medicine. Nat Med 2025;31:3270–3282.
3.    Peng N, Song SJ, Hui VW, Lai JC, Wong GL, Wong VW, et al. Foundations of Artificial
      Intelligence in Hepatology: What a Clinician Needs to Know. J Clin Exp Hepatol 2026;16:103183.
4.    Anteby R, Klang E, Horesh N, Nachmany I, Shimon O, Barash Y, et al. Deep learning for
      noninvasive liver fibrosis classification: A systematic review. Liver Int 2021;41:2269–2278.
5.    Rodriguez LA, Schmittdiel JA, Liu L, Macdonald BA, Balasubramanian S, Chai KP, et al.
      Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease. JAMA
      Netw Open 2024;7:e2421019.
6.    Shin H, Hur MH, Song BG, Park SY, Kim GA, Choi G, et al. AI model using CT-based imaging
      biomarkers to predict hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol
      2025;82:1080–1088.
7.    Esteva A, Robicquet A, Ramsundar B, Kuleshov V, DePristo M, Chou K, et al. A guide to deep
      learning in healthcare. Nat Med 2019;25:24–29.
8.    Omiye JA, Gui H, Rezaei SJ, Zou J, Daneshjou R. Large Language Models in Medicine: The
      Potentials and Pitfalls : A Narrative Review. Ann Intern Med 2024;177:210–220.
9.    Kresevic S, Giuffre M, Ajcevic M, Accardo A, Croce LS, Shung DL. Optimization of hepatological
      clinical guidelines interpretation by large language models: a retrieval augmented generation-based
      framework. NPJ Digit Med 2024;7:102.
10.   Ge J, Chen IY, Pletcher MJ, Lai JC. Prompt Engineering for Generative Artificial Intelligence in
      Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Am J Gastroenterol 2024;119:1709–1713.
11.   Ng KKY, Matsuba I, Zhang PC. RAG in Health Care: A Novel Framework for Improving
      Communication and Decision-Making by Addressing LLM Limitations. NEJM AI
      2025;2:AIra2400380.
12.   Liu F, Niu Y, Zhang Q, Wang K, Dong Z, Wong IN, et al. A foundational architecture for AI agents
      in healthcare. Cell Rep Med 2025;6:102374.
13.   Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, et al. Attention is all you need.
      Advances in neural information processing systems 2017;30.
14.   Guo D, Yang D, Zhang H, Song J, Wang P, Zhu Q, et al. DeepSeek-R1 incentivizes reasoning in
      LLMs through reinforcement learning. Nature 2025;645:633–638.
15.   Wang S, Hu M, Li Q, Safari M, Yang X. Capabilities of gpt-5 on multimodal medical reasoning
      [Internet]. arXiv [Preprint]. 2025 Available from: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2508.08224.
16.   Nori H, Lee YT, Zhang S, Carignan D, Edgar R, Fusi N, et al. Can generalist foundation models
      outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine [Internet]. arXiv [Preprint]. 2023 [cited
      2026 Jul 8]. Available from: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.16452.
17.   Xie Q, Chen Q, Chen A, Peng C, Hu Y, Lin F, et al. Medical foundation large language models for
      comprehensive text analysis and beyond. NPJ Digit Med 2025;8:141.
18.   Singhal K, Azizi S, Tu T, Mahdavi SS, Wei J, Chung HW, et al. Large language models encode
      clinical knowledge. Nature 2023;620:172–180.
19.   Gu Y, Tinn R, Cheng H, Lucas M, Usuyama N, Liu X, et al. Domain-specific language model
      pretraining for biomedical natural language processing. ACM Transactions on Computing for
      Healthcare (HEALTH) 2021;3:1–23.
20.   Jiang LY, Liu XC, Nejatian NP, Nasir-Moin M, Wang D, Abidin A, et al. Health system-scale
      language models are all-purpose prediction engines. Nature 2023;619:357–362.
21.   Van Veen D, Van Uden C, Blankemeier L, Delbrouck JB, Aali A, Bluethgen C, et al. Adapted large
      language models can outperform medical experts in clinical text summarization. Nat Med
      2024;30:1134–1142.
                                                                                          Page 28 of 37


22.   Lu MY, Chen B, Williamson DFK, Chen RJ, Zhao M, Chow AK, et al. A multimodal generative
      AI copilot for human pathology. Nature 2024;634:466–473.
23.   Taylor-Weiner A, Pokkalla H, Han L, Jia C, Huss R, Chung C, et al. A Machine Learning Approach
      Enables Quantitative Measurement of Liver Histology and Disease Monitoring in NASH.
      Hepatology 2021;74:133–147.
24.   Calderaro J, Ghaffari Laleh N, Zeng Q, Maille P, Favre L, Pujals A, et al. Deep learning-based
      phenotyping reclassifies combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma. Nat Commun
      2023;14:8290.
25.   Campanella G, Chen S, Singh M, Verma R, Muehlstedt S, Zeng J, et al. A clinical benchmark of
      public self-supervised pathology foundation models. Nat Commun 2025;16:3640.
26.   Ding T, Wagner SJ, Song AH, Chen RJ, Lu MY, Zhang A, et al. A multimodal whole-slide
      foundation model for pathology. Nat Med 2025;31:3749–3761.
27.   Chen RJ, Ding T, Lu MY, Williamson DFK, Jaume G, Song AH, et al. Towards a general-purpose
      foundation model for computational pathology. Nat Med 2024;30:850–862.
28.   Kraljevic Z, Bean D, Shek A, Bendayan R, Hemingway H, Yeung JA, et al. Foresight-a generative
      pretrained transformer for modelling of patient timelines using electronic health records: a
      retrospective modelling study. Lancet Digit Health 2024;6:e281–e290.
29.   Acosta JN, Falcone GJ, Rajpurkar P, Topol EJ. Multimodal biomedical AI. Nat Med
      2022;28:1773–1784.
30.   Gorenshtein A, Omar M, Glicksberg BS, Nadkarni GN, Klang E. AI Agents in Clinical Medicine:
      A Systematic Review [Internet]. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 [cited 2026 Jul 8]. Available from:
      https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.22.25334232.
31.   Ferber D, El Nahhas OSM, Wölflein G, Wiest IC, Clusmann J, Leßmann ME, et al. Development
      and validation of an autonomous artificial intelligence agent for clinical decision-making in
      oncology. Nat Cancer 2025;6:1337–1349.
32.   Aydin S, Karabacak M, Vlachos V, Margetis K. Large language models in patient education: a
      scoping review of applications in medicine. Front Med (Lausanne) 2024;11:1477898.
33.   Almagazzachi A, Mustafa A, Eighaei Sedeh A, Vazquez Gonzalez AE, Polianovskaia A, Abood
      M, et al. Generative Artificial Intelligence in Patient Education: ChatGPT Takes on Hypertension
      Questions. Cureus 2024;16:e53441.
34.   Caglar U, Yildiz O, Meric A, Ayranci A, Gelmis M, Sarilar O, et al. Evaluating the performance
      of ChatGPT in answering questions related to pediatric urology. J Pediatr Urol 2024;20:26.e21–
      26.e25.
35.   He Z, Bhasuran B, Jin Q, Tian S, Hanna K, Shavor C, et al. Quality of Answers of Generative Large
      Language Models Versus Peer Users for Interpreting Laboratory Test Results for Lay Patients:
      Evaluation Study. J Med Internet Res 2024;26:e56655.
36.   Alanezi F. Examining the role of ChatGPT in promoting health behaviors and lifestyle changes
      among cancer patients. Nutr Health 2025;31:739–748.
37.   Jin D, Pan E, Oufattole N, Weng W-H, Fang H, Szolovits P. What Disease Does This Patient Have?
      A Large-Scale Open Domain Question Answering Dataset from Medical Exams. Applied Sciences
      2021;11:6421.
38.   Papineni K, Roukos S, Ward T, Zhu W-J. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine
      Translation. In. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics,
      2002:311–318.
39.   Bedi S, Cui H, Fuentes M, Unell A, Wornow M, Banda JM, et al. Holistic evaluation of large
      language models for medical tasks with MedHELM. Nat Med 2026.
40.   Thirunavukarasu AJ, Ting DSJ, Elangovan K, Gutierrez L, Tan TF, Ting DSW. Large language
      models in medicine. Nature Medicine 2023;29:1930–1940.
41.   Topaz M, Roguin N, Gupta P, Zhang Z, Peltonen LM. Fabricated citations: an audit across 2.5
      million biomedical papers. Lancet 2026;407:1779–1781.
                                                                                             Page 29 of 37


42.   Chen S, Kann BH, Foote MB, Aerts H, Savova GK, Mak RH, et al. Use of Artificial Intelligence
      Chatbots for Cancer Treatment Information. JAMA Oncol 2023;9:1459–1462.
43.   Qazi IA, Ali A, Khawaja AU, Akhtar MJ, Sheikh AZ, Alizai MH. Automation Bias in Large
      Language Model–Assisted Diagnostic Reasoning among Physicians Trained in AI Literacy — A
      Randomized Clinical Trial. NEJM AI 2026;3:AIoa2501001.
44.   Tejani AS, Ng YS, Xi Y, Rayan JC. Understanding and Mitigating Bias in Imaging Artificial
      Intelligence. Radiographics 2024;44:e230067.
45.   Ge J, Sun S, Owens J, Galvez V, Gologorskaya O, Lai JC, et al. Development of a liver disease-
      specific large language model chat interface using retrieval-augmented generation. Hepatology
      2024;80:1158–1168.
46.   Kleiner DE, Brunt EM, Van Natta M, Behling C, Contos MJ, Cummings OW, et al. Design and
      validation of a histological scoring system for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology
      2005;41:1313–1321.
47.   Loomba R, Ratziu V, Harrison SA, Group NCTDIW. Expert Panel Review to Compare FDA and
      EMA Guidance on Drug Development and Endpoints in Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis.
      Gastroenterology 2022;162:680–688.
48.   Davison BA, Harrison SA, Cotter G, Alkhouri N, Sanyal A, Edwards C, et al. Suboptimal reliability
      of liver biopsy evaluation has implications for randomized clinical trials. J Hepatol 2020;73:1322–
      1332.
49.   Ratziu V, Hompesch M, Petitjean M, Serdjebi C, Iyer JS, Parwani AV, et al. Artificial intelligence-
      assisted digital pathology for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: current status and future directions. J
      Hepatol 2024;80:335–351.
50.   Pulaski H, Harrison SA, Mehta SS, Sanyal AJ, Vitali MC, Manigat LC, et al. Clinical validation of
      an AI-based pathology tool for scoring of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. Nat
      Med 2025;31:315–322.
51.   Iyer JS, Juyal D, Le Q, Shanis Z, Pokkalla H, Pouryahya M, et al. AI-based automation of
      enrollment criteria and endpoint assessment in clinical trials in liver diseases. Nat Med
      2024;30:2914–2923.
52.    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA qualifies first AI drug development tool, will be used
      in “MASH” clinical trials. US Food and Drug Administration, <https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-
      safety-and-availability/fda-qualifies-first-ai-drug-development-tool-will-be-used-mash-clinical-
      trials>. Accessed 8 Jul 2026.
53.    European Medicines Agency. Qualification opinion for Artificial Intelligence-Based Measurement
      of Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis Histology in Liver Biopsies to Determine Disease Activity in
      NASH/MASH Clinical Trials. European Medicines Agency, Committee for Medicinal Products
      for Human Use (CHMP), <https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/other/qualification-opinion-
      artificial-intelligence-based-measurement-non-alcoholic-steatohepatitis-histology-liver-biopsies-
      determine-disease-activity-nash-mash-clinical-trials_en.pdf>. Accessed 8 Jul 2026.
54.   Naoumov NV, Brees D, Loeffler J, Chng E, Ren Y, Lopez P, et al. Digital pathology with artificial
      intelligence analyses provides greater insights into treatment-induced fibrosis regression in NASH.
      J Hepatol 2022;77:1399–1409.
55.   Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, Adams LA, Bjornsson ES, Charatcharoenwitthaya P, et al.
      Liver Fibrosis, but No Other Histologic Features, Is Associated With Long-term Outcomes of
      Patients With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Gastroenterology 2015;149:389–397 e310.
56.   Ekstedt M, Hagstrom H, Nasr P, Fredrikson M, Stal P, Kechagias S, et al. Fibrosis stage is the
      strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 33 years of follow-up.
      Hepatology 2015;61:1547–1554.
57.   Maghsoudi H, Khonche A, Gereami R, Gharebakhshi F. Physics-aware imaging AI for quantitative
      MASLD biomarker mapping: a systematic review of deep learning and radiomics across ultrasound,
      CT, and MRI. Abdom Radiol (NY) 2025.
                                                                                          Page 30 of 37


58.   Vianna P, Calce SI, Boustros P, Larocque-Rigney C, Patry-Beaudoin L, Luo YH, et al. Comparison
      of Radiologists and Deep Learning for US Grading of Hepatic Steatosis. Radiology
      2023;309:e230659.
59.   Kwon H, Kim MG, Oh S, Kim Y, Jung G, Lee HJ, et al. Application of Quantitative
      Ultrasonography and Artificial Intelligence for Assessing Severity of Fatty Liver: A Pilot Study.
      Diagnostics (Basel) 2024;14.
60.   Jeon SK, Lee JM, Joo I, Yoon JH, Lee G. Two-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network Using
      Quantitative US for Noninvasive Assessment of Hepatic Steatosis in NAFLD. Radiology
      2023;307:e221510.
61.   Pickhardt PJ, Blake GM, Graffy PM, Sandfort V, Elton DC, Perez AA, et al. Liver Steatosis
      Categorization on Contrast-Enhanced CT Using a Fully Automated Deep Learning Volumetric
      Segmentation Tool: Evaluation in 1204 Healthy Adults Using Unenhanced CT as a Reference
      Standard. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2021;217:359–367.
62.   Hu N, Yan G, Tang M, Wu Y, Song F, Xia X, et al. CT-based methods for assessment of metabolic
      dysfunction associated with fatty liver disease. Eur Radiol Exp 2023;7:72.
63.   Yoo J, Joo I, Jeon SK, Park J, Yoon SH. Utilizing fully-automated 3D organ segmentation for
      hepatic steatosis assessment with CT attenuation-based parameters. Eur Radiol 2024;34:6205–
      6213.
64.   Wong GL, Hui VW, Tan Q, Xu J, Lee HW, Yip TC, et al. Novel machine learning models
      outperform risk scores in predicting hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic viral
      hepatitis. JHEP Rep 2022;4:100441.
65.   Hao T, Huang Z, Liang L, Weng H, Tang B. Health Natural Language Processing: Methodology
      Development and Applications. JMIR Med Inform 2021;9:e23898.
66.   Huang J, Yang DM, Rong R, Nezafati K, Treager C, Chi Z, et al. A critical assessment of using
      ChatGPT for extracting structured data from clinical notes. NPJ Digit Med 2024;7:106.
67.   Khooblall A, Viswanath SE, Khawaja L, Gadani S. Artificial Intelligence Applications in the
      Diagnosis and Management of Cirrhosis and Portal Hypertension: A Narrative Review. Tech Vasc
      Interv Radiol 2025;28:101078.
68.   Wang QC, Jiao J, Zhang CQ. Application of artificial intelligence in portal hypertension and
      esophagogastric varices. World J Gastroenterol 2025;31:108508.
69.   Far AT, Bastani A, Lee A, Gologorskaya O, Huang CY, Pletcher MJ, et al. Evaluating the positive
      predictive value of code-based identification of cirrhosis and its complications utilizing GPT-4.
      Hepatology 2025;81:1753–1763.
70.   Li Y, Li Z, Li J, Liu L, Liu Y, Zhu B, et al. The actual performance of large language models in
      providing liver cirrhosis-related information: A comparative study. Int J Med Inform
      2025;201:105961.
71.   Yeo YH, Samaan JS, Ng WH, Ting PS, Trivedi H, Vipani A, et al. Assessing the performance of
      ChatGPT in answering questions regarding cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Mol
      Hepatol 2023;29:721–732.
72.   Pradhan F, Fiedler A, Samson K, Olivera-Martinez M, Manatsathit W, Peeraphatdit T. Artificial
      intelligence compared with human-derived patient educational materials on cirrhosis. Hepatol
      Commun 2024;8.
73.   Gottweis J, Weng WH, Daryin A, Tu T, Sirkovic P, Myaskovsky A, et al. Accelerating scientific
      discovery with Co-Scientist. Nature 2026.
74.   Guan Y, Cui L, Inchai J, Fang Z, Law J, Brito AAG, et al. AI-Assisted Drug Re-Purposing for
      Human Liver Fibrosis. Adv Sci (Weinh) 2025;12:e08751.
75.   Ding W, Zhang J, Jin Z, Hua H, Zu Q, Yang S, et al. Artificial intelligence-driven pathomics in
      hepatocellular carcinoma: current developments, challenges and perspectives. Discov Oncol
      2025;16:1424.
                                                                                             Page 31 of 37


76.   Cheng N, Ren Y, Zhou J, Zhang Y, Wang D, Zhang X, et al. Deep Learning-Based Classification
      of Hepatocellular Nodular Lesions on Whole-Slide Histopathologic Images. Gastroenterology
      2022;162:1948–1961 e1947.
77.   Kiani A, Uyumazturk B, Rajpurkar P, Wang A, Gao R, Jones E, et al. Impact of a deep learning
      assistant on the histopathologic classification of liver cancer. NPJ Digit Med 2020;3:23.
78.   Zhang X, Yu X, Liang W, Zhang Z, Zhang S, Xu L, et al. Deep learning-based accurate diagnosis
      and quantitative evaluation of microvascular invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma on whole-slide
      histopathology images. Cancer Med 2024;13:e7104.
79.   Chen M, Zhang B, Topatana W, Cao J, Zhu H, Juengpanich S, et al. Classification and mutation
      prediction based on histopathology H&E images in liver cancer using deep learning. NPJ Precis
      Oncol 2020;4:14.
80.   Lin H, Wei C, Wang G, Chen H, Lin L, Ni M, et al. Automated classification of hepatocellular
      carcinoma differentiation using multiphoton microscopy and deep learning. J Biophotonics
      2019;12:e201800435.
81.   Chen Q, Xiao H, Gu Y, Weng Z, Wei L, Li B, et al. Deep learning for evaluation of microvascular
      invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma from tumor areas of histology images. Hepatol Int
      2022;16:590–602.
82.   Shi JY, Wang X, Ding GY, Dong Z, Han J, Guan Z, et al. Exploring prognostic indicators in the
      pathological images of hepatocellular carcinoma based on deep learning. Gut 2021;70:951–961.
83.   Liu Z, Liu Y, Zhang W, Hong Y, Meng J, Wang J, et al. Deep learning for prediction of
      hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence after resection or liver transplantation: a discovery and
      validation study. Hepatol Int 2022;16:577–589.
84.   Zeng Q, Klein C, Caruso S, Maille P, Allende DS, Minguez B, et al. Artificial intelligence-based
      pathology as a biomarker of sensitivity to atezolizumab-bevacizumab in patients with
      hepatocellular carcinoma: a multicentre retrospective study. Lancet Oncol 2023;24:1411–1422.
85.   Wang Q, Huang Y, Zhang Y, Zhu Y, Hu P, Xu Y, et al. Digital pathology-based prognostic model
      for hepatocellular carcinoma: Integrating pathomics signatures with clinical parameters for
      recurrence prediction and biological interpretation. Comput Methods Programs Biomed
      2026;275:109180.
86.   Liao H, Long Y, Han R, Wang W, Xu L, Liao M, et al. Deep learning-based classification and
      mutation prediction from histopathological images of hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl Med
      2020;10:e102.
87.   Wiest IC, Bhat M, Clusmann J, Schneider CV, Jiang X, Kather JN. Large language models for
      clinical decision support in gastroenterology and hepatology. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology &
      Hepatology 2025;22:773–787.
88.   Yang K, Lee J, Jang JW, Sung PS, Han JW. Evaluating the clinical utility of large language models
      for hepatocellular carcinoma treatment recommendations: A nationwide retrospective registry
      study. PLoS Med 2026;23:e1004855.
89.   Deeb M, Gangadhar A, Rabindranath M, Rao K, Brudno M, Sidhu A, et al. The emerging role of
      generative artificial intelligence in transplant medicine. Am J Transplant 2024;24:1724–1730.
90.   Kleebayoon A, Wiwanitkit V. Letter to the Editor: ChatGPT and unknown clinical questions about
      liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2024;30:E22.
91.   Umman V, Tosun B, Uygur A, Emre S. Evaluation of the Effectiveness, Safety, and Patient
      Satisfaction of Artificial Intelligence-Based Patient Education and Counseling for Both Recipients
      and Donors in the Preoperative and Postoperative Phases of Organ Transplantation. Transplant
      Proc 2025;57:1832–1839.
92.   Robitschek E, Bastani A, Horwath K, Sordean S, Pletcher MJ, Lai JC, et al. A large language
      model-based approach to quantifying the effects of social determinants in liver transplant decisions.
      NPJ Digit Med 2025;8:665.
                                                                                                Page 32 of 37


93.    Hasjim BJ, Azarfar G, Lee FG, Diwan TS, Raju S, Gross JA, et al. A multiagent large language
       model-based system to simulate the liver transplant selection committee: a retrospective cohort
       study. Lancet Digit Health 2026;8:100966.
94.    Qu L, Balachandar N, Zhang M, Rubin D. Handling data heterogeneity with generative replay in
       collaborative learning for medical imaging. Med Image Anal 2022;78:102424.
95.    Clunie DA, Dennison DK, Cram D, Persons KR, Bronkalla MD, Primo HR. Technical Challenges
       of Enterprise Imaging: HIMSS-SIIM Collaborative White Paper. J Digit Imaging 2016;29:583–
       614.
96.    Celi LA, Cellini J, Charpignon M-L, Dee EC, Dernoncourt F, Eber R, et al. Sources of bias in
       artificial intelligence that perpetuate healthcare disparities—A global review. PLOS digital health
       2022;1:e0000022.
97.    Clusmann J, Balaguer-Montero M, Bassegoda O, Schneider CV, Seraphin T, Paintsil E, et al. The
       barriers to uptake of artificial intelligence in hepatology and how to overcome them. J Hepatol
       2025;83:1410–1426.
98.    Petersson L, Larsson I, Nygren JM, Nilsen P, Neher M, Reed JE, et al. Challenges to implementing
       artificial intelligence in healthcare: a qualitative interview study with healthcare leaders in Sweden.
       BMC Health Serv Res 2022;22:850.
99.    Gallifant J, Afshar M, Ameen S, Aphinyanaphongs Y, Chen S, Cacciamani G, et al. The TRIPOD-
       LLM reporting guideline for studies using large language models. Nat Med 2025;31:60–69.
100.   Cruz Rivera S, Liu X, Chan AW, Denniston AK, Calvert MJ, Spirit AI, et al. Guidelines for clinical
       trial protocols for interventions involving artificial intelligence: the SPIRIT-AI extension. Nat Med
       2020;26:1351–1363.
101.   Liu X, Cruz Rivera S, Moher D, Calvert MJ, Denniston AK, Spirit AI, et al. Reporting guidelines
       for clinical trial reports for interventions involving artificial intelligence: the CONSORT-AI
       extension. Nat Med 2020;26:1364–1374.
102.    U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Marketing Submission Recommendations for a
       Predetermined Change Control Plan for Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Device Software Functions:
       Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff. U.S. Food and Drug
       Administration,                   <https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-
       documents/marketing-submission-recommendations-predetermined-change-control-plan-
       artificial-intelligence>. Accessed 8 Jul 2026.
103.    European Parliament Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European
       Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial
       intelligence and amending certain Union legislative acts (Artificial Intelligence Act). Official
       Journal of the European Union, OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024, <https://eur-
       lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj>. Accessed 8 Jul 2026.
                                                                                                Page 33 of 37


Table 1. Glossary of key terms in generative AI

 Key term                   Explanation
                            A design framework where AI systems exhibit goal-directed autonomy,
                            coordinating reasoning, planning, tool execution, and multi-step
                            workflows to accomplish complex tasks with minimal human supervision,
 Agentic AI
                            such as reviewing longitudinal liver tests, retrieving clinical guidance,
                            checking elastography or imaging results, and drafting a management
                            summary for clinician review.
                            A software system that combines an AI model with tools, memory, and
                            planning to act on hepatology tasks, for example extracting cirrhosis
 AI agent                   complications from the EHR, ordering relevant guideline passages through
                            retrieval, calculating MELD-Na or fibrosis scores, and flagging missing
                            HCC surveillance while keeping a human clinician in the loop.
                            A prompting technique that asks an LLM to reason through intermediate
                            clinical steps before producing an answer, mimicking human problem-
 Chain-of-thought           solving to improve accuracy on complex reasoning tasks. In clinical use,
                            the reasoning should be summarized and evidence-linked rather than
                            exposed as unsupported hidden logic.
                            A generative model that creates images by iteratively denoising random
                            noise. In hepatology, diffusion models may support synthetic liver
 Diffusion model            imaging, histology augmentation, lesion segmentation, or privacy-
                            preserving data generation, but require careful validation to avoid
                            unrealistic pathology or biased imaging features.
                            Adapting model behaviour by giving a few examples in the prompt, such
                            as examples of how to extract ascites, variceal bleeding, encephalopathy,
 Few-shot learning
                            antiviral therapy, or MASLD risk factors from hepatology clinic notes
                            without additional model training.
                            Further training a pretrained model on hepatology-specific datasets, such
                            as liver clinic notes, radiology reports, pathology reports, transplant
 Fine-tuning
                            records, or guideline question-answer pairs, to improve performance on
                            specialized tasks.
                            A large-scale pretrained model that can be adapted to many hepatology
                            applications, including LLMs for clinical notes and guidelines, vision
 Foundation model
                            models for ultrasound/CT/MRI or digital pathology, and multimodal
                            models linking reports, laboratory trends, imaging, and histology.
                            A subset of AI focus on generating new content, such as text, images or
 Generative AI
                            synthetic data, by learning patterns from existing data.
                            The generation of plausible but factually incorrect, inconsistent, or
                            unsupported content by a generative model, such as inventing a guideline
 Hallucination
                            recommendation, misstating HCC surveillance intervals, or citing non-
                            existent evidence; a critical challenge for reliability in clinical applications.
                            A deep learning model trained on massive text datasets to understand and
 LLM                        generate human-like language, capable of tasks like answering questions,
                            writing and reasoning.
                            Models capable of processing and generating content across multiple data
 Multimodal AI
                            modalities (e.g., text, images, audio) within a unified framework.
                                                                                                Page 34 of 37


                             The input text or instruction given to a generative model to guide its output;
 Prompt
                             effective prompting is key to obtaining desired results.
                             The practice of designing and refining prompts to optimize AI responses
 Prompt engineering
                             for accuracy, relevance, and creativity.
                             A technique that enhances LLM responses by fetching relevant external
                             information from a knowledge base before generation. In hepatology, RAG
 RAG
                             can connect patient-specific questions to up-to-date guidelines and
                             institutional protocols to reduce unsupported responses.
                             A specialized AI model optimized for complex, multi-step problem-
 Reasoning model             solving. Unlike standard LLMs, it uses internal chain-of-thought processes
                             to plan and self-correct before answering.
                             A training approach in which human preferences guide model behavior.
 Reinforcement      learning For hepatology, feedback from hepatologists, transplant clinicians,
 from human feedback         radiologists, pathologists, nurses, and patients could help align outputs
                             with clinical accuracy, safety, clarity, and patient-centered communication.
                             A neural network using self-attention mechanisms to process sequential
 Transformer architecture    data in parallel, forming the foundation of most modern LLMs and
                             generative models.
                             A type of multimodal AI that jointly processes images and text. In
                             hepatology, VLMs may connect ultrasound, CT, MRI, endoscopy, or
 VLM                         digital pathology images with radiology/pathology reports and clinical
                             context for tasks such as lesion description, steatosis or fibrosis assessment,
                             and HCC workup support.
                             The ability of a model can perform a task it was not explicitly trained on,
 Zero-shot learning
                             relying solely on its general knowledge and the provided prompt.


Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; CT, computed tomography; EHR, electronic health records; HCC,
hepatocellular carcinoma; LLM, large language model; MELD-Na, model for end-stage liver disease-
sodium; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; RAG, retrieval-augmented generation; VLM, vision-language model.
                                                                                     Page 35 of 37


Figure legends
Figure 1. The proposed pipeline of generative AI development in medicine.

The primary technical schema of generative AI development in medicine is designed to transform

broad, general-purpose knowledge into specialized, clinically actionable intelligence. This

pipeline involves pretraining foundation models to establish general abilities, domain adaptation

through fine-tuning, downstream deployment, and grounding using techniques such as prompt

engineering or RAG, and embedding the generative models within an agentic AI framework.

Abbreviations: APIs, application programming interfaces; CLIP, Contrastive language-image

pretraining; CoT, chain-of-thought; EHRs, electronic health records; GPT, generative pre-trained

transformer; MAE, masked autoencoders; MoE, mixture-of-experts; RAG, retrieval-augmented

generation; RLHF, reinforcement learning from human feedback; SFT, supervised fine-tuning.
                                                                                    Page 36 of 37


Figure 2. Evolution of general LLMs and domain‑specific medical models.

The timeline illustrates the co‑evolution of general‑purpose LLMs (lower branch) and

domain‑specific medical models (upper branch), starting from the Transformer architecture.

Abbreviations: BERT, bidirectional encoder representations from Transformers; EHR, electronic

health records; GPT, generative pre-trained Transformer; LLM, large language model; MedQA,

medical question answering; OSCE, objective structured clinical examination; PCP, primary care

physicians; USMLE, United States medical licensing examination.
                                                                                        Page 37 of 37


Figure 3. Generative AI applications across the spectrum of liver diseases.

The pipeline in blue illustrates the proposed general workflow: embedding knowledge from

multimodal data into liver-specific foundation models and building agentic systems that execute

specific clinical actions. The green boxes depict the current or preliminary applications across the

spectrum of liver diseases.

Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; DICOM, digital imaging and communications in

medicine; EHR, electronic health record; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma;

LLM, large language model; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease;

MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; MRI-PDFF, magnetic resonance

imaging proton density fat fraction; VLM, vision-language model
