Tables and Figures: 0
Supplemental Material: 1



Title: Research Letter: Application of GPT-4 to select next-step antidepressant treatment in
major depression

Short title: Antidepressant treatment selection by GPT-4

Authors: Roy H. Perlis, MD MSc (1,2)*

Affiliations:
(1) Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
(2) Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA


Correspondence:
*Roy H. Perlis
rperlis@mgh.harvard.edu
Massachusetts General Hospital
185 Cambridge Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02114
617-726-7426

Disclosure:
Dr. Perlis has received consulting fees from Burrage Capital, Genomind, RID Ventures, Belle
Artificial Intelligence, Vault Health, and Takeda. He holds equity in Belle Artificial Intelligence,
Circular Genomics, Psy Therapeutics, and Vault Health.

Acknowledgments:
Dr. Perlis is supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R01MH116270)
Abstract

Introduction: Large language models perform well on a range of academic tasks including

medical examinations. The performance of this class of models in psychopharmacology has not

been explored.

Method: Chat GPT-plus, implementing the GPT-4 large language model, was presented with

each of 10 previously-studied antidepressant prescribing vignettes in randomized order, with

results regenerated 5 times to evaluate stability of responses. Results were compared to expert

consensus.

Results: At least one of the optimal medication choices was included among the best choices in

38/50 (76%) vignettes: 5/5 for 7 vignettes, 3/5 for 1, and 0/5 for 2. At least one of the poor

choice or contraindicated medications was included among the choices considered optimal or

good in 24/50 (48%) of vignettes. The model provided as rationale for treatment selection

multiple heuristics including avoiding prior unsuccessful medications, avoiding adverse effects

based on comorbidities, and generalizing within medication class.

Conclusion: The model appeared to identify and apply a number of heuristics commonly applied

in psychopharmacologic clinical practice. However, the inclusion of less optimal

recommendations indicates that large language models may pose a substantial risk if routinely

applied to guide psychopharmacologic treatment without further monitoring.
Introduction



Large language models have been shown to perform well on a range of academic tasks1, with

GPT-4 achieving above-median scores on the Medical College Admission Test2 and passing the

US Medical Licensing Exam3. These models have begun to be explored in more focused medical

problem-solving as well4. One such class of problems is treatment selection in psychiatry, often

cited as an opportunity to apply artificial intelligence to better match patients with optimal

treatments.



In prior work, the author and colleagues found that many predictors of antidepressant treatment

outcome are non-specific5, such that machine learning models performed modestly in treatment

selection. In routine clinical practice, treatment selection is simple to implement in terms of

rules6, and we have previously shown that clinicians commonly apply such heuristics in selecting

treatments7, specifically as they relate to comorbidities and adverse effect profiles. However, this

process may become more arbitrary when multiple rules conflict, and different weights must be

assigned, or when there remain numerous reasonable options after application of rules.



In the present investigation, the author sought to evaluate the performance of one such model,

GPT 42, on a basic psychopharmacologic task, namely selecting the optimal antidepressant

treatment after non-response to an initial treatment. The author and colleagues previously created

and validated brief vignettes about adults with major depressive disorder illustrating aspects of

psychopharmacologic decisionmaking, and presented these vignettes to a panel of experienced

clinicians8. These clinicians were asked to rank the appropriateness of a list of antidepressants
for each vignette. We then presented these vignettes to a group of clinicians via web-based

survey, along with a decision support dashboard, as part of an investigation about explainable

artificial intelligence8. Here, these validated vignettes were applied to investigate the

performance of a publicly-available large language model on this task, in order to gain insight

about strengths and limitations of this model as it pertains to possible application in psychiatry,

and medicine more broadly.



Method



Chat-GPT-plus, which implements the GPT 4 large language model2, was presented with each of

the 10 vignettes in randomized order, with random variation in age and distractor medications,

with results regenerated 5 times to evaluate stability of responses. All interactions were recorded

between April 12, 2023 and April 14, 2023. The chat was re-initialized for each vignette. In

order to receive recommendations, a prompt was developed that indicated that the question was

not for clinical application; absent such a prompt, the model declined to answer, indicating it was

not able to provide medical advice. The prompt sought to mimic the original rating task,

presenting a vignette followed by the treatment options. The key element of the prompt was,

“Please rate each of the following medications, from "Best choice for this patient" to "Good

choice for this patient" to "Less good choice for this patient" to "Bad choice for this patient, or

contraindicated"”. Results were then compared to those of expert clinicians in terms of a)

whether the optimal expert-curated treatment was identified among the best options, and b)

whether a less good or contraindicated treatment was identified among the best or good options,

with descriptive statistics (proportion of correct trials) calculated. The author then manually
curated model-provided explanations in order to gain further insight into the processes

underlying treatment selection.



Results



With the standard prompt, at least one of the optimal medication choices was included among the

best choices in 38/50 (76%) (5/5 for 7 vignettes, 3/5 for 1, and 0/5 for 2). At least one of the poor

choice or contraindicated medications was included among the best or good choices in 24/50

(48%) (including 2 vignettes with 5/5, 2 with 4/5, one with 3/5, 3 with 1/5, one with 0/5).



A number of phenomena were apparent in the narrative explanations for treatment choice

(Supplemental Materials). Prior treatment non-response was recognized as a reason not to re-use

the same medication. However, the model did not consistently generalize across mechanistic

classes – for example, recommending another SSRI after initial SSRI failure – although it did in

some cases, noting an SSRI “may not be the best choice for this patient, as they have not worked

for her before.” The model also recognized escitalopram as an enantiomer of citalopram.



The concept of indication was recognized (i.e., noting that a treatment was used for depression,

while avoiding milnacipran as not approved for depression, and down-rating other

antidepressants as having less evidence for efficacy in some contexts), including other

indications such as OCD and diabetic neuropathy. In one case, however, an indication for

bupropion (smoking cessation) was identified as a rationale for scoring that medication as less

favorable.
Potential adverse effects that may exacerbate medical comorbidities were recognized as reasons

to avoid medications. For example, among individuals with a history of arrhythmia, tricyclic

antidepressants were avoided (although not QT-prolonging SSRIs), as was lowering seizure

threshold in individuals with prior seizures – although on one run the model identified lower

seizure threshold as a reason for caution but still listed bupropion as a good treatment option.

However, the tendency to cause a given AE was apparently hallucinated in some cases, such as

avoiding anticholinergic medications in atopic dermatitis or bupropion in atrial fibrillation.



In some cases, the model correctly matched adverse effect profile to patient symptoms or

comorbidities, most notably with obesity (favoring bupropion, e.g.) and weight loss (favoring

mirtazapine). For example, it noted “This medication may be particularly beneficial … because it

can help with both depression and fatigue, and it has a lower risk of weight gain compared to

some other antidepressants.” However, while recognizing weight gain as a side effect (“it has a

higher risk of weight gain, which may not be ideal for a patient with obesity”), it often favored

medications with weight gain risk as good options for obese patients.



Another heuristic that emerged in some model runs was the notion of drug-drug interactions.

Interactions were largely hallucinated (e.g., SSRIs with amoxicillin, while amoxicillin is not a

CYP450 substrate; clarithromycin, a CYP450 3A4 inhibitor, with non CYP3A4 substrates; and

essentially any medication with MAO inhibitors). The model also indicated a preference for

newer drugs on the basis of overall tolerability and risk for drug interactions; in nearly all cases,

tricyclic antidepressants and MAOIs were disfavored, noting side effect burden and for the latter,
dietary restrictions and (mostly hallucinated) drug-drug interactions. (Notably, the one

circumstance a tricyclic antidepressant was favored was a vignette identifying a history of

obsessive-compulsive disorder, for which clomipramine was identified as an optimal choice).



Discussion



A publicly-available large language model, GPT-4, provided generally reasonable medication

recommendations for pharmacotherapy of major depression after initial antidepressant

nonresponse, consistently identifying optimal treatment in 76% of vignettes, but also advised less

optimal or contraindicated approaches for all but one vignette. By comparison, in a prior

clinician survey using these vignettes, an optimal treatment was selected for 36% of vignettes

presented8. The model appeared to identify and apply a number of common heuristics in clinical

practice – avoiding medications that had not shown efficacy in the past, favoring better-tolerated

medications, avoiding medications with adverse effects that could worsen medical comorbidities,

and avoiding drug-drug interactions. However, it sometimes failed to consistently apply a

medication contraindication (regarding bupropion and seizures, e.g.), sometimes advised

medication associated with weight gain to obese patients, and demonstrated a lack of ability to

reliably identify and apply drug-drug interactions.



In prior work, the author and colleagues found evidence that clinicians commonly apply simple

heuristics in selecting antidepressant treatment7. This study suggests that a large language model

also applies such heuristics without their being specified explicitly. As many of these heuristics

would likely apply across psychopharmacologic decisionmaking, this represents an encouraging
observation for application of these models in prescribing more generally. On the other hand,

given the frequency with which adverse effects were hallucinated, or not applied as

contraindications, extreme caution is needed in applying any such recommendations.



GPT-4 consistently responded with language cautioning against clinical application; without

framing prompts in terms of teaching or some other non-clinical use, it would not return

recommendations. (Interestingly, these warnings often noted that GPT-4 is not a ‘licensed’

psychiatrist, despite the reality that most antidepressants are prescribed by non-psychiatrists).

Since trivial tweaks to the prompt did enable receipt of medical advice, albeit with caveats, this

work also suggests the likelihood that these models will be applied in clinical settings as they

become more accessible, regardless of warnings to the contrary. The implication of such clinical

use requires further study.



More broadly, this work reinforces the importance of developing and applying systematic

measures of quality in psychopharmacology, in order to reliably understand the impact of

technology deployment. There is growing awareness of the extent to which machine learning

models may be widely deployed despite poor performance9 and biased outcomes10. The ease

with which large language models may be applied to guide prescribing, and the superficially

reasonable results we identify, indicates the need to track when such algorithms are applied and

how they impact outcomes.
References

1. OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. Published online March 27, 2023.
   doi:10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774

2. Bommineni VL, Bhagwagar S, Balcarcel D, Bommineni V, Davazitkos C, Boyer D.
   Performance of ChatGPT on the MCAT: The Road to Personalized and Equitable Premedical
   Learning. Published online March 7, 2023:2023.03.05.23286533.
   doi:10.1101/2023.03.05.23286533

3. Nori H, King N, McKinney SM, Carignan D, Horvitz E. Capabilities of GPT-4 on Medical
   Challenge Problems. Published online March 20, 2023. Accessed April 11, 2023.
   https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/capabilities-of-gpt-4-on-medical-
   challenge-problems/

4. Potapenko I, Boberg-Ans LC, Stormly Hansen M, Klefter ON, van Dijk EHC, Subhi Y.
   Artificial intelligence-based chatbot patient information on common retinal diseases using
   ChatGPT. Acta Ophthalmol. Published online March 13, 2023. doi:10.1111/aos.15661

5. Hughes MC, Pradier MF, Ross AS, McCoy TH, Perlis RH, Doshi-Velez F. Assessment of a
   Prediction Model for Antidepressant Treatment Stability Using Supervised Topic Models.
   JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(5):e205308. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.5308

6. Perlis RH. Abandoning personalization to get to precision in the pharmacotherapy of
   depression. World Psychiatry. 2016;15(3):228-235. doi:10.1002/wps.20345

7. Lage I, Pradier MF, McCoy TH, Perlis RH, Doshi-Velez F. Do clinicians follow heuristics in
   prescribing antidepressants? J Affect Disord. 2022;311:110-114.
   doi:10.1016/j.jad.2022.04.128

8. Jacobs M, Pradier MF, McCoy TH, Perlis RH, Doshi-Velez F, Gajos KZ. How machine-
   learning recommendations influence clinician treatment selections: the example of the
   antidepressant selection. Transl Psychiatry. 2021;11(1):108. doi:10.1038/s41398-021-01224-x

9. Wong A, Otles E, Donnelly JP, et al. External Validation of a Widely Implemented
   Proprietary Sepsis Prediction Model in Hospitalized Patients. JAMA Internal Medicine.
   2021;181(8):1065-1070. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.2626

10.    Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm
  used to manage the health of populations. Science. 2019;366(6464):447-453.
  doi:10.1126/science.aax2342
